Social Learning in a Network Model of Covid-19*
Allan Davids1, Gideon du Rand2, Co-Pierre Georg1,
Tina Koziol2, and Joeri Schasfoort†1
1School of Economics, University of Cape Town
2Department of Economics, Stellenbosch University
This version: April 19, 2021
Abstract
This paper studies the effects of social learning on the transmission of Covid-19 in a net-
work model. We calibrate our model to detailed data for Cape Town, South Africa and show
that the inclusion of social learning improves the prediction of excess fatalities, reducing
the best-ﬁt squared difference from 20.06 to 11.28. The inclusion of social learning both
ﬂattens and shortens the curves for infections, hospitalizations, and excess fatalities. This
result is qualitatively different from ﬂattening the curve by reducing transmission proba-
bility through non-pharmaceutical interventions. While social learning reduces infections,
this alone is not sufﬁcient to curb the spread of the virus because learning is slower than the
disease spreads. We use our model to study the efﬁcacy of different vaccination strategies
and ﬁnd that a risk-based vaccination strategy–vaccinating vulnerable groups ﬁrst–leads to
a 50% reduction in fatalities and 5% increase in total infections compared to a random-
order benchmark. By contrast, using a contact-based vaccination strategy reduces infec-
tions by 9% but results in 64% more fatalities relative to the benchmark.
Keywords: Covid-19, Social Learning, DeGroot Model, Epidemiological Network Model,
Vaccination Strategy
JEL codes: C63, I18
*We are grateful to seminar participants at the University of Cape Town School of Economics, Stellenbosch
University, and the National COVID-19 Modelling Consortium of South Africa, and in particular Krishna Dasaratha
for helpful comments and discussion and Peter Courtney for his excellent research assistance. The source code and
replication ﬁles for this paper can be found here. All errors are our own.
†Corresponding author. E-Mail: joeri.schasfoort@uct.ac.za
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

1 Introduction
While epidemiological models have been crucial in steering policy responses to the Covid-19
pandemic, their predictive performance has been poor (Ioannidis, Cripps and Tanner, 2020;
Moein et al., 2021). 1 Economists have focused their efforts to improve the predictive power of
epidemiological models towards adding more realistic human behaviour. 2 Recent empirical
evidence (Bailey et al., 2021; Makridis and Wang, 2020) shows that individuals reduce their mo-
bility more if contacts in their social networks live in areas more severely affected by Covid-19.
Despite this, Covid-19 models have so far not included social learning.
In Section 2, we introduce naive social learning (DeGroot, 1974) in a model of Covid-19 trans-
mission among physically interacting agents. In our model, agents are represented as nodes in
a network and their interactions as edges. Each agent has an epidemiological state correspond-
ing to the Susceptible, Exposed, Infected, Recovered (SEIR) compartments in the tradition of
Kermack and McKendrick (1927). Each day, agents change their state between these compart-
ments. As in SEIR models, the spread of the virus, measured by the reproductive number R,
is determined by two factors: (1) the contact rate, which is the frequency with which different
agents engage; and (2) the transmission probability, which is the likelihood an infection takes
place if two agents engage. In line with other state-of-the-art economic Covid-19 models (El-
lison, 2020), our model features a heterogeneous contact rate that depends on agent age and
location in the city, calibrated using demographic data on age-distributions, the composition
of households, age-based contact matrices, and travel surveys. Similarly to other agent-based
Covid-19 models such as Rockett et al. (2020); Almagor and Picascia (2020), and the well-known
Imperial College model of Ferguson et al. (2020), the transmission probability is ﬁxed while the
contact rate can be directly inﬂuenced by the government through non-pharmaceutical inter-
ventions (NPIs), also known, and hereafter referred to aslockdown regulations.
However, in contrast to these models, our agents endogenously determine their contact rate
based on both the government signal about the prevalence of Covid-19 as well as a social signal
that is informed by the epidemiological state of connected agents. The social signal is deter-
mined by a form of naive social learning that closely follows Dasaratha, Golub and Hak (2020)
and earlier work by Golub and Jackson (2010). Agents in our model not only learn from infor-
mation about infections among their network contacts, but also from their neighbors’ decision
to change their behavior in response to infections in their environment. Both inform an agent’ s
1See, for example, “The simulations driving the world’ s response to COVID-19” - Nature, 2 April 2020
2See Verelst, Willem and Beutels (2016) for a survey of the epidemiological literature that features behavioural
change. We discuss the rapidly growing literature of models that feature both disease transmission and some form
of optimal agent behaviour in the literature review at the end of this section.
1
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

decision to physically interact with other agents, which in turn directly affects the transmission
of Covid-19. The latter is a key channel of social learning in networks (Golub and Sadler, 2016),
consistent with recent empirical evidence on the role of social networks during pandemics (Bai-
ley et al., 2021).
Using this model, we study the impact of social learning on the spread of Covid-19 in Cape
Town, South Africa. All South African epidemiological models overestimated both the pro-
jected number of infections at the peak of the ﬁrst wave as well as its duration—some signif-
icantly so.3 This was surprising since the South African government, due to economic consid-
erations, started relaxing the stringent national lockdown policies while infections were still ris-
ing.4 Therefore, most models predicted an exponential increase in infections in South Africa. 5
Despite relaxing the lockdown during this period, the peak of the excess fatality curve—generally
considered the most reliable measure of Covid-19—was surprisingly low and it ended quicker
than expected.6
To initialise our model, we use demographic data from the South African National census, con-
tact matrices from Prem, Cook and Jit (2017), the National Household travel survey, initial de-
tected cases from the Western Cape government, information about the government signal
from the Oxford Stringency Index (Hale et al., 2020), information about observed mobility from
Google, and fatality statistics recorded in South African hospitals. For epidemiological param-
eters we use estimates found in the extant literature. The remaining free parameters of our
model, that we could not calibrate using these sources, are the transmission probability, the
number of initial infections as well as two parameters related to the weight and distribution of
social learning.7 We discuss all parameters in detail in Section 3.
Results are shown in Section 4. We, ﬁrst, jointly estimate the free parameters for both a ver-
sion of the model with- and one without social learning, in each version ﬁnding the parameter
choices to minimize a loss function as in Nelder and Mead (1965). In the model with social
learning, we obtain a best-ﬁt squared difference between the model prediction and the empir-
3See, for example, the National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD) in South Africa citing a lack of
human behaviour within national epidemiological models as a reason for over-projected deaths: “The known the
unknown and the unknowable modelling Covid-19 between scarce data and the need to make decisions”–NICD,
24 July 2020, Accessed 30 March 2021.
4Based on Hale et al. (2020), who develop a lockdown stringency index which scores lockdowns worldwide on
a 0-100 scale where 0 is the least and 100 is the most stringent lockdown. In response to the Covid-19 outbreak,
South Africa went into a lockdown with a 87.96 stringency index at the start of our simulation period that was
slowly reduced to 80.56 by the end of our period of interest.
5See, “Model prediction overview from the South African Government”
6Excess fatalities are generally considered to be more reliable, given widespread concerns about the under-
counting of both infections (Adepoju, 2020) and fatalities (Pasquariello and Stranges, 2020; Leon et al., 2020).
7Testing in South Africa was severely limited at the beginning of the pandemic, hence the number of initial cases
cannot be reliably estimated and we treat it as a free parameter.
2
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

ically observed excess fatality curve of 11.28, while for the model without social learning the
best-ﬁt squared difference is 20.06. There are many models that demonstrate a much better
ﬁt (Ambrosio and Aziz-Alaoui, 2020; Acuña-Zegarra, Santana-Cibrian and Velasco-Hernandez,
2020), but in these cases a functional form is chosen for the reproductive rate as the pandemic
progresses, implying that either the contact rate or transmission probability (or both) have an
exogenous functional form. In contrast, in our model, the reproductive rate endogenously
slows down as the infection spreads through the network, with a contact rate that is determined
by the behaviour of our agents while the transmission probability is ﬁxed.
To better understand how social learning improves the model ﬁt over and above a calibration
based on transmission probability—the standard free parameter in these types of models—we
perform two sensitivity analyses, independently varying the weight of social learning and the
transmission probability.
We ﬁnd that a higher weight for social learning simultaneously decreases the height and du-
ration of the curves for the infection, hospitalization, fatality, and excess fatality. For example,
in our calibrated model, increasing the weight of social learning from 0.85 to 0.95 leads to 7%
fewer infections and 11% fewer fatalities while keeping the peak infection day the same. In con-
trast, a decreased transmission probability of 2% reduces infections by 11%, fatalities by 19%.
However, it simultaneously pushes the peak infection day out 3 days.
Furthermore, we ﬁnd that in contrast to changing the transmission probability, the effect of
changing the weight of social learning is non-linear. If we increase the strength of the social
signal relative to the private signal, there is very little effect on infections for relative strengths
between 0.0 and 0.8. However, between a relative strength of 0.8 and 1.0, the fatalities and
infections are strongly reduced until plateauing at 79% of what infections would be without
social learning. In our calibration exercise, we ﬁnd a best-ﬁt relative strength of the social signal
of 0.85.
To further understand social learning, we explore how social learning affects the effectiveness
of lockdown regulations by comparing the calibrated model with lockdown regulations to a
hypothetical scenario in which there were no government interventions. In particular, we are
interested if adding behaviour to the model would alter the conclusion that a strict lockdown
was necessary, which is one of the main criticisms raised against the standard epidemiological
Covid-19 models (see, for example, Shen, Taleb and Bar-Yam (2020); Squazzoni et al. (2020)).
Comparing our baseline lockdown scenario to a no-intervention alternative in which agents
voluntarily reduce their interactions, we ﬁnd that lockdown regulations remain highly effective
even when social learning is introduced.
With best-ﬁt relative strength of social learning, lockdown regulations reduce end-of-simulation
3
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

infections from 81% to 49% of the population. Furthermore, the intervention ﬂattens the curve
and pushes out the peak of infections by three weeks. Also, under the intervention scenario,
hospitals are overburdened for 11 days, rather than the 43 days as in the no-intervention sce-
nario. As a consequence of both reduced infections and a less overburdened hospital system,
total deaths are reduced by 54% in the intervention scenario, compared to the no-intervention
scenario.8 Under the intervention scenario agents reduce their contacts on average by 50%
(from 18 daily contacts to 9), while under the no-intervention scenario they reduce contacts
voluntarily by 28% (from 18 daily contacts to 13).
Social learning reduces infections in the intervention scenario, and even more so in the no-
intervention scenario. Introducing social learning together with a lockdown reduces total in-
fections by 3.8%. Compared to this, adding social learning to models of Covid-19 disease trans-
mission has a stronger effect in the no-intervention scenario, reducing infections by 5.7%, peak
critical cases by 11.7% and deaths by 7.7%. Despite this, 80% of the population becomes in-
fected, which can be explained by the fact that even without social learning compliance in the
lockdown model is already high, averaging 82%, limiting the impact of social learning.
Finally, in Section 5 and before we conclude in Section 6, we explore how three age-based vac-
cination strategies affect fatalities, critical cases, and infections, had the vaccine been available
at the start of the virus outbreak in Cape Town. The ﬁrst strategy is the control group in which
age classes are randomly given priority. The second strategy is a risk based strategy in which
older agents get vaccinated ﬁrst. In the third scenario, agents in age groups that have more con-
nections are vaccinated ﬁrst. Vaccinating the elderly ﬁrst leads to a 50% reduction in fatalities
compared to vaccinating in a random order (which is already effective, reducing fatalities rela-
tive to the no-intervention scenario by 65%). However, this comes at the cost of a 5%increase in
total infections. On the other hand, the contact based vaccination strategy reduces infections
by 9%, compared to the random benchmark. However, it leads to 64% more fatalities than the
benchmark random vaccination scenario.
Our paper relates to two separate strands of literature. First, we introduce social learning to the
growing epidemiological literature studying the spread of Covid-19 using agent-based models.
And second, building on the literature that studies social learning in networks, we contribute
to the nascent economic literature that incorporates learning into epidemiological models by
studying the effect of social learning.
When it comes to epidemiological Covid-19 models, our model is most closely related to other
8We explicitly focus on the cost of life and do not consider economic costs. For an analysis that incorporates
economic cost, see for example Krueger, Uhlig and Xie (2020), Acemoglu et al. (2020) and Eichenbaum, Rebelo and
Trabandt (2020).
4
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

detailed Covid-19 network models, including the Imperial College Model (Ferguson et al., 2020),
which has been used to inform the Covid-19 strategy of the UK government. We also use the
classic Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) Kermack and McKendrick (1927) structure that is
the backbone of standard differential equation models and implement this within a Covid-19
network model. 9 Our major contribution to the literature relative to these models is that we
incorporate social learning, in which agents learn from their neighbours state rather than the
global state.
Consequently, our model is also related to the large epidemiological literature which incorpo-
rates behaviour and learning into pandemic models—see Verelst, Willem and Beutels (2016)
for a survey of this literature—in addition to a growing literature of economic epidemiological
models (e.g. Toxvaerd (2020), Eichenbaum, Rebelo and Trabandt (2020), Krueger, Uhlig and Xie
(2020), Dasaratha (2020)) which incorporates optimizing behaviour. The optimizing mecha-
nisms in these class of models typically involve agents who face a trade off between wanting to
leave home to earn an income to satisfy their economic needs versus wanting to stay at home to
minimize the risk and cost of infection, which is typically a function of aggregate infections. Our
model is similar to these efforts in introducing behaviour to epidemiological model. However,
rather than individuals optimising their behaviour, learning is social in our model.
Finally, our paper is related to the literature on on social learning in in networks (Golub and
Sadler (2016); DeGroot (1974); Golub and Jackson (2010)) with an epidemiological literature us-
ing network models to model the spread of diseases (Danon et al. (2011); Keeling and Eames
(2005)). Our ﬁnding that social learning improves compliance and reduces infections is con-
sistent with empirical evidence from recent and growing literature on the role of social net-
works in individual decision making and behaviour (Bailey et al., 2018), in particular, Bailey
et al. (2021) and Charoenwong, Kwan and Pursiainen (2020) who ﬁnd that increases in Covid-
19 cases within an individuals social network leads to reduced mobility and increased compli-
ance with stay-at-home orders. Within this literature, our paper is closely related to Makridis
and Wang (2020) who study the impact of social learning on consumption during a pandemic,
within a consumption and savings network-based model. The authors show that when com-
pared to a model without social learning, including social learning leads to a greater reduction
in consumption, as learning leads to an increased in perceived infections by agents as they in-
ternalize the infectious state of the nodes in their network. The authors focus explicitly on the
9Our model could be classiﬁed as a Susceptible Exposed Infected without symptoms, Infected with symptoms,
in need of Critical care, Recovered, Dead model. However like most Covid-19 models—see e.g. Mwalili et al. (2020);
Calaﬁore, Novara and Possieri (2020)—we still classify this as a SIR model because each additional compartment
can be seen as a sub-category of these three. We also calibrate our model using contact matrices and detailed
population data. We choose the agent-based structure because it naturally incorporates a network structure and
using heterogeneous agents means that local learning is possible.
5
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

role of social learning on consumption during a pandemic and do not allow for social learning
to affect the progression of the disease. In that regard, our model contributes to this literature by
studying how social learning affects disease progression. We also distinguish our work through
how we allow social learning to inﬂuence behaviour. In Makridis and Wang (2020), agents learn
about the true state of infections solely through the infection state of the nodes in their network,
in the vein of Golub and Jackson (2010). In our model, we closely follow the implementation of
social learning in Dasaratha, Golub and Hak (2020), whereby agents receive a noisy private sig-
nal of the state of the world and use a weighted combination of this noisy private signal and a
social signal, derived from social learning, to form a compliance decision.
2 The Model
We simulate the spread of Covid-19 in a network of physical interactions modelled as an undi-
rected graph G = (N , E ) where the set of nodes N represent agents and the set of edges E ⊂
(N × N ) represent physical interactions between them.10
In this section, we discuss: (i) the agents and their characteristics, (ii) the network that governs
interactions among agents, (iii) the epidemiological status updates and disease transmission,
and (iv) the technical details of how we implement the model numerically.11
2.1 Agents
There is a set of agents N , living in households H in a city with districts W .12 Agents j ∈ N are
characterized by their epidemiological state P j and four agent-speciﬁc parameters, age a j ∈ A ,
home district w j ∈ W , district to travel to w ′
j ∈ W and household h j ∈ H that remain constant
throughout the simulation. We model nine age groups,A = {0−10,10 −20,. .. ,70 −80,80 +}, and,
in our speciﬁc application to the cities of Cape Town and Johannesburg, 116 and 135 districts
W respectively.
An agent’ s epidemiological status P j can take seven values: Susceptible to infection ( S); Ex-
posed but not infectious ( E); Infectious but asymptomatic ( I as ); Infectious and symptomatic
10We sometimes refer to physical interactions as social connections.
11In Appendix B, we provide a detailed pseudo-code description of the model.
12We use the convention that sets are denoted by formal script, e.g. N ; the value of a variable (such as the
cardinality of a set) are denoted by upper case letters (e.g. N ≡ |N |), and generic elements are denoted by lower
case letters (e.g. an agent is denoted as j ∈ N ). Indices denoting generic elements of a set are subscripts, while
additional identiﬁers are superscripts.
6
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

(I s); Critically ill ( C ); Recovered ( R); or Deceased ( D).13 The two sub-categories of the infec-
tious status are important as there are clear indications that some individuals with Covid-19
never show symptoms but still infect others. The critically ill category is used to compare the
number who require hospitalization to the critical care capacity of the health system–in our
model, the probability of death increases if there are more critically ill patients than hospitals
have capacity. While such agents are medically still infectious, we assume they are isolated in
hospital where they are unable to infect other agents.14
When initialising the agents j ∈ N , we assign them a district to live in w j proportional to the
relative share of people living in this district relative to the full city population. For each agent
j ∈ Nw ⊂ N , we randomly assign an age groupa j using the observed district level age distribu-
tion data F age.
2.2 Agent Interactions
Agents interact in the network G that represents the possible interactions of individuals within
a city, calibrated to observed contact matrices from Prem, Cook and Jit (2017), which we de-
note F hc.15 We model agent interaction with other agents separately for household and non-
household interactions.
2.2.1 Household Interactions
The set of agents in district w, denoted Nw , is partitioned into a disjoint set of households H w
of different sizes. Let Nh,w be the set of agents in household h in district w (i.e. ⋃
h∈H w
Nh,w =
Nw ) with household size Nh,w = |Nh,w |. Agents in each household are all connected with one
another. The set of households in each district, H w , is constructed iteratively, by randomly
drawing households sizes Nh,w from the empirical observed distribution of households sizes
speciﬁc to each district until ∑
h∈H w
Nh,w = Nw .16 This yields, for each district w, a set of house-
13The epidemiological literature denotes these values as compartments and we follow this nomenclature on oc-
casion.
14We use this simplifying assumption to model the situation where patients who are isolated in hospital cannot
spread the disease in their regular social networks.
15F hcis a matrix that records the best estimates of data on daily number of contacts between individuals in
different age categories within the same household. It has the following structure: row a of the square matrix
F hccontains the list of average daily number of contacts that an individual in age category a is expected to have
with an individual in each of the age categories represented by the columns of F hc. A probability distribution of
likely contact of someone of age category a with someone of age category b is constructed by normalizing the
entries of row a of F hcso that they add to one.
16We observe the empirical distribution of households sizes for each district using national census data. Since
the algorithm is stochastic and we use representative agent populations smaller than the actual populations in the
7
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

holds H w of different sizes so that there are a total of Hw = |H w | households in district w,
representative of the observed household size distribution for each district.
After initializing a realistic district level distribution of households of varying sizes, we then
proceed to assign each agent j ∈ N to a household H w in order to match the observed within-
household age probability distribution F hc. We proceed in two steps.
First, for each household h in district w, we select a household head as follows: From the set
of agents in the district, we randomly select an agent j ∈ N −
w (sequentially over households,
without replacement) to be head of household h, where N −
w denotes the subset of all agents in
Nw unassigned to a household. The selected household head has age-category a j , which was
assigned across agents, by district to match available data on age-distributions per district (as
described in Section 2.1). This process continues until each of the Hw households in region w
has a household head.
Second, for household h with household head of age ah and household size Nh,w , we select
additional household members sequentially, randomly, and without replacement fromN −
w ac-
cording to the probability distribution constructed from the empirical household contact ma-
trix F hcuntil there are Nh,w members, then move on to the next household.
2.2.2 Non-Household Interactions
Non-household interactions take place in the model each day of the simulation t ∈ [0,T ] when
agents travel across the city. When this happens, agent j in district w belonging to household
h forms non-household edges with agents in N \ Nh,w . The formation of edges is constructed
to be consistent with two sources of data: a non-household contact matrix from Prem, Cook
and Jit (2017) which we denote F ocand an observed travel matrix constructed using data from
a nationally representative travel survey, which we denoteF tv. F ocrecords the best estimates of
data on daily number of contacts between individuals in different age categories outside of the
household.17 F tvrecords the probability that an agent in district w travels to district w ′ on any
given day.18 The number of non-household connections that agent j makes, N oc
j is the total
number of average non-household contacts for an agent in age category a j as recorded in F oc.
The set of agents with whom agent j forms non-household edges is constructed in two steps.
city modelled, there are some additional algorithmic features that ensure that (i) the maximum household size
randomly drawn remains smaller than remaining number of agents to be assigned to a household at every point
in the algorithm, and (ii) that the ﬁnal number of agents in a district correspond to the proportional size of that
district given the ratio of total modeled agents to actual population of the city.
17Its structure is identical to that of F hcdescribed in footnote 15.
18See Appendix E for the details on the construction of F tv.
8
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Figure 1: City network example.
This schematic shows a 40-agent, 2-district city network att = 14 generated by our algorithm. Household
edges are dotted and other edges are continuous. The nodes are agents and the colours mark differences
in their epidemiological status p j .
First, agent j selects a destination district w ′ according to the empirical probabilities in F tv. It-
erating over all agents, this yields apopulation of potential contacts in each district that consists
of all agents from other districts who selected it as a destination. Denote the population of po-
tential contacts in district w ′ as N tv
w ′ . Second, for each agent j with destination district w ′, we
create edges to agents that are randomly selected from N tv
w ′ \ {j }, without replacement, accord-
ing to the probability distribution implied by the non-household contact matrix F oc, until N oc
j
new edges have been created.19
To summarize, the algorithm generates the networkG which contains, for each agent j a neigh-
bourhood of all contacts N j ⊂ N to or from whom the virus can be transmitted. Let agent j be
in household h, then N j is composed of two components that can be differently impacted by
lockdown regulations: a neighbourhood of household contacts N hc
j and a neighbourhood of
19The algorithm is robust to implementations with smaller populations where it is possible thatN oc
j > |N tv
w ′ |. See
Algorithm 4.
9
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

non-household contacts N oc
j , i.e. N j = N hc
j
⋃ N oc
j .
We present a stylized network for a model with 40 agents in two districts in Figure 1 where
household edges are dotted and other edges are continuous. The nodes are agents and the
colours mark differences in their epidemiological status p j . The main clusters that can be ob-
served represent agents that travel to the same location every day. The virus can then spread to
other districts via the household links when agents travel back to their home district.
2.3 Epidemiological Status Updates and Disease Transmission
In each period of the simulation t ∈ [0,T ], the epidemiological status of each agent ( P j (t)) is
updated. Disease transmission takes place as agents interact. Interactions are contacts be-
tween two agents who share an edge in E . When a susceptible agent i (Pi (t) = S) interacts with
an infectious agent j (P j (t) ∈ {I as, I s}), transmission of the virus occurs with probability πE .20
Importantly, πE is only positive for infectious agents ( P j (t) ∈ {I as, I s}) and is 0 otherwise. Put
differently susceptible, exposed, recovered, critical and dead agents cannot infect susceptible
agents. While critical agents are still infectious, we assume they are isolated in hospital where
they are unable to infect other agents.
2.3.1 Initial Infections
The ﬁrst agents to update their epidemiological status from susceptible S to one of the infected
compartments (E, I as or I s) are agents that are created at the start of the simulation ( t = 0).
We assign initial infections based of the observed number of cases per district at the beginning
of the Covid-19 outbreak, F ca. Within each district, we pick a random agent and update their
initial status to P j (0) ∈ {E , I as, I s} (with equal probability), and assume that the agent has been
in this for a random number of days T P
j (0) ∈ [0, τP ], where τP is the tenure in compartment P.
2.3.2 Evolution of Previously Infected Agents
Agents transition through the various phases or compartments of the disease via a system of
between-state probabilities, which denote the probability that an agent moves from any given
state to the following state. We present the disease progression schematically in Figure 2. We
20The basic infectiousness of the disease πE is an uncertain parameter that we treat as a constant over time
and across individuals in this model as a simpliﬁcation (see Section 3.2 for our calibration.). As more certain
results become available in the medical literature, simple extensions of the model can consider situations where
e.g. children are less likely to become infected and/or transmit the disease than older individuals.
10
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

calibrate these probabilities using estimates from the literature which we discuss in a later sec-
tion.21
Figure 2: Schematic of the disease progression.
This schematic shows the disease progression modelled in SABCoM. Solid arrow between compartments
represent transitions of an agent to different disease statuses. Dashed arrows represent social connec-
tions along which the virus may be transmitted from infectious to susceptible individuals.
While the probability of infection πE , the probability of developing symptomatic version of the
disease πs are age-invariant probabilities, we model the probability of becoming critical πC ,a j
and the probability of deathπD,a j as age-varying probabilities consistent with existing evidence
of varying mortality rates by age-group (Verity et al., 2020). Lastly, we augment to the probability
of death πD,a j to include an important feature of the Covid-19 pandemic, increased mortality
21See footnote 20 for a discussion on the basic infectiousness of the diseaseπE , which is an uncertain parameter.
11
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

rates when the health system is overburdened. We model this via a multiplier δL. We model δL
as:
δL =
{
Q > 1 if N C (t − 1) > L
1 otherwise
, (1)
where L is the capacity of the health system, N C (t − 1) is the total number of agents in the
critical state in period t − 1, and Q is the empirical multiplier that increases the probability of
dying when hospital capacity is overwhelmed. This generates a probability of death of δLπD,a j .
2.3.3 Agent Behaviour, Lockdown Regulations and New Infections
We study the impact that behavioural responses to lockdown regulations have on the trans-
mission of the disease. These interventions take many forms, such as “lockdowns” (also called
shelter-in-place or stay-at-home orders) and policies that encourage proper hygiene, mask wear-
ing and social distancing. We consider only one aspect of these policies in our model: agents’
degree of compliance with policies that aim to reduce physical interaction.
The major methodological contribution of this paper is to consider how social learning affects
the compliance of individuals with lockdown regulations and in turn study how this affects
disease transmission. Our implementation of social learning closely follows that of Dasaratha,
Golub and Hak (2020).22
In each periodt, every agent j observes a public signalξ(t) and a private signalζj (t). The public
signal represents the stringency of lockdown measures put in place. We model the public signal
using a time varying lockdown stringency indexξ(t) = F st r i n(t)
100 from Hale et al. (2020), measuring
the stringency of the lockdown in South Africa relative to all other countries, where 1 represents
the most stringent lockdown and 0 represents the least stringent. Each agent then observes a
unique private signal ζj (t) which consists of the public signal ξ(t) and an individual noise term
εj (t), where εj (t) is drawn independently for each j from a truncated normal distribution with
support [−ξ(t),1 − ξ(t)] and mean 0 and standard deviation σ, such that ζj (t) ∈ [0,1]. Formally,
ζj (t) = ξ(t) + εj (t).
After observing their private signal, agents proceed to set their level of compliance φj (t) with
policies that aim to reduce physical interaction. We model the level of complianceφj (t) of each
agent as a weighted average of the private signal ζj (t) (with weight of ρ) and a social signal
(with weight of (1 − ρ)). The social signal is the simple average of observed t − 1 stringency of
22See Golub and Sadler (2016) for a survey of the learning in social networks literature.
12
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

compliance of all neighbours. Formally 1
N j (t −1)
∑
k∈N j
φk(t − 1):
φj (t) = ρζ j (t) + (1 − ρ) 1
N j
∑
k∈N j
φk(t − 1)
In this way, compliance depends both on an agents observation of the aggregate stringency
of lockdown measures as well as the compliance levels of their neighbours. After choosing a
level of compliance, a physical meeting between two agentsi and j occurs with a time-varying,
pair-speciﬁc probability πM
i ,j (t) modelled as:
πM
i ,j (t) =
{
1 if i ∈ N hc
j(
ω + (1 − ω)(1 − φi (t)
)(
ω + (1 − ω)(1 − φj (t)
)
otherwise
, (2)
The probability πM
i ,j (t) ﬁrstly depends on nature of contacts - whether these contacts occur
within the household or outside the household. Agent j has daily physical meetings with all
members of their household, so that if i ∈ N hc
j ⇒ πM
i ,j (t) = 1. Second, for members in the set
of non-household contacts of agent j , the probability of a meeting between j and i ∈ N oc
j de-
pends on three parameters, ω ∈ [0,1] and φi (t) and φj (t).
We model ω ∈ [0,1] to represent the minimum share of contacts that each agent will still visit
under the most stringent lockdown regulations, where ω = 0 means that under the strictest
lockdown an agent will have no contacts whereas ω = 1 means that even if agents fully comply
with the strictest possible lockdown agents will have full contacts. Therefore, in between these
two extremes, this parameter reﬂects the fact that agents will still have some contacts even un-
der a very strict lockdown. After all, while lockdowns restrict movement, many agents will still
need to leave home, most notably essential workers.
The probability that agent i and agent j meet is therefore a function of their own adherence
to lockdown regulations and the aggregate reduction in mobility. Put differently, when gov-
ernments enact a lockdown, the restrictions in place limit full mobility, however, some mo-
bility always occurs ( ω). Over and above this level of minimal mobility, agents can make ad-
ditional contacts, and the extent to which they make additional contacts, depends on their
non-compliance with regulation (1 − φ). To build intuition consider the extreme case where
φi (t) = 1 and φj (t) = 1 and agents fully comply. The probability of meeting reduces to ω2, the
minimum amount of mobility. 23 This functional form therefore encodes two features: ﬁrstly
even with full compliance to policy, some physical meetings may happen during the course of
23Put differently, ω2 represents a ﬂoor on the level of mobility.
13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

everyday life, and (ii) individuals can always coordinate to ensure a meeting should they wish to
do so strongly enough. An alternative way of thinking about this within our model framework
is that without any intervention the base assumption is that individuals meet with their non-
household contacts with certainty every day. Without the inclusion of ω, the probability of two
agents meeting would reduce to a function of their non-compliance, and two fully compliant
agents would never meet. Given what we know about essential workers, contacts do still occur,
even in a full lockdown. The inclusion of ω therefore prevents agents from being able to fully
cut themselves off from making connections in their network of non-household contacts.24
In summary, any given period agent i and j physically meets with probability πM
i ,j (t). Condi-
tional on a meeting, if one agent is susceptible and the other is infectious, the virus is transmit-
ted with probability πE .
2.4 Implementation
We implement the model using Python using publicly available data, ensuring full reproducibil-
ity.25 In addition to the variables deﬁned above, we make use of auxiliary (internal) variables
during the simulation to keep track of how long each agent has been in each epidemiological
state. Furthermore, we keep track of the number of other agents have been infected by each
agent in the current period as well as in total. Finally, we store each agent’ s neighbours, their
number of contacts, as well as the household number neighbors belong to.
For our ﬁrst simulation day, we record the set of edges E . On every simulated day t, we record
the epidemiological status P, district number w j , and age group a j of every agent along with
the number of other agents it has infected during that day. This data is recorded and stored.
We use Monte Carlo methods, simulating the model V times. For each simulation, we seed the
pseudo random number generator with a different number v ∈ V , ensuring both that its results
can be replicated and that changes in output for the same seed can be attributed to changes in
policy rather than changes in stochastic factors.
24Economic epidemiological models encode a similar logic whereby agents trade off wanting to leave home to
earn an income to satisfy their economic needs versus wanting to stay at home to minimize the risk of infection. In
these models, no matter how high the infection cost is, there will always be agents whereby the economic beneﬁt
from making an contact with others exceed the cost of infection, given a distribution of economic needs. The
forces that drive these kinds of agents to always make trips, irrespective of infection risk, are captured in ω.
25Find the code and replication ﬁles on our GitHub repository, here.
14
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

3 Calibration
Our model calibration can be divided into four parts. First, we set a baseline for the simulation-
speciﬁc parameters. Second, we assign values to parameters that are associated with the clinical
features of Covid-19 progression. Third, we calibrate the geo-spatial and demographic features
to data for Cape Town. Finally, we estimate the remaining parameters for which we could not
ﬁnd a value in the data or literature.
Overall, there are 16 parameters and 9 input ﬁles used in the numerical simulation. Of the pa-
rameters, 3 are simulation parameters, 9 are related to the Covid-19 pathogen (Table 1), 2 are
related to social learning, 1 considers the capacity of the health system in both cities, and 1 is
related to the effectiveness of lockdown policies. In this section, we discuss how we calibrate
these parameters. The values have been set using data and literature wherever possible. How-
ever, there are four parameters for which we were not able to ﬁnd values in the data or literature.
Therefore, we estimate them based on excess fatality data.
3.1 Simulation Parameters
We run our simulations with N = 100, 000 agents. Every simulation runs for a minimum of
T = 350 days and is repeated V = 50 times using Monte Carlo simulation methods to average
out stochastic effects. Because we simulate each parameter set V = 50 times, we are able to
produce conﬁdence intervals for our predictions.
3.2 Covid-19 Parameters
With respect to parameters which pertain to the Covid-19 pathogen, we choose best available
estimates from peer-reviewed medical journals. Despite there still being considerable uncer-
tainty around the clinical course and transmission of the disease, we were able to ﬁnd literature
estimates for most parameters.
The Covid-19 parameters are chosen from recent studies (see Chen et al., 2020; Verity et al.,
2020; Huang et al., 2020, among others). Table 1 provides an overview of all parameters and
their sources.
Because we could not ﬁnd a literature estimate for πE , the probability of transmission when an
infectious agents comes into contact with a susceptible agent, we will estimate its value along
with our policy parameters. This procedure will be described in section 3.4.
15
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Table 1: Covid-19 pathogen related parameters
This table reports parameter choices for the Covid-19 pathogen used in the model. For each
parameter, we report the chosen value and the applicable medical study.
Name Description Value Source(s)
Latency period (τE) Length of incubation phase 4 Silal et al. (2020)
Recovery period asymptomatic infection (τas) Average number of days a person
remains infectious if asymptomatic
7 Silal et al. (2020)
Transition period symptomatic infection (τs) Transition period symptomatic infection 7 Huang et al. (2020); Silal et al. (2020)
Days in Critical compartment (τC) Average number of days admitted
to the ICU unit
11 Chen et al. (2020); Silal et al. (2020)
Probability to become Asymptomatic (πas) Probability to become an
asymptomatic carrier
0.6165 Ing, Cocks and Green (2020)
Yang, Gui and Xiong (2020)
Probability to become critically ill (πC,a)
(age dependent)
Probability to become critically ill
and require hospitalization
PANEL B Verity et al. (2020)
Probability to die (πD,a)
(age dependent)
Probability to enter deceased state
when critically ill
PANEL B Verity et al. (2020)
Health system overburdened multiplier (δL) Factor by which the probability
to die increases if
health system is over capacity
1.79 Chen et al. (2020)
(a) Covid-19 pathogen related parameters
0-10 10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 50-60 60-70 70-80 80+
πC ,a 0.1% 0.3% 1.2% 3.2% 4.9% 10.2% 16.6% 24.4% 27.3%
πD,a 2.1% 3.3% 3.4% 5.3% 9.7% 15.5% 24.9% 30.1% 37.1%
(b) Age speciﬁc probabilities to enter critical or deceased states
16
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

3.3 Applying the Model to Cape Town
We calibrate our model to Cape Town, which covers over 2,400 square kilometers and have a
population of 3, 740, 026.26 The city are sub-divided in W = 116 administrative districts, known
as wards.27 Calibrating our model to Cape Town means that we populate our input ﬁles with
data that is representative of the city and set our health system parameter based on actual hos-
pital capacities. In this way, our model can easily be applied to any other city, where similar
data is available.
Our ﬁrst input data ﬁle F popcontains the population and age distribution per ward, The second
ﬁle F hsis the empirically observed household size distribution for all districts in the city. For
each of these ﬁles, we use ward-level data from the South African National Census for 2011.
Then, we make use of social contact matrices for South Africa as a proxy for social contact ma-
trices, obtained from Prem, Cook and Jit (2017). The contact matrices are the A × A age-group
household contact matrix F hc, and non-household contact matrix F oc, respectively. These ma-
trices specify how many average daily contacts people in a particular age group have with oth-
ers, by age group. The matrices include total contacts, household contacts, as well as work and
school contacts. Since we only consider household and non-household contacts, their reported
household contacts form F hc. To obtain a measure for non-household contacts, F oc, we sim-
ply subtract household contacts, F hc from total contacts. We illustrate the total household and
non-household social contact matrix in Table 2. Between the age groups 0-10 and 40-50 we
see a signiﬁcant share of interactions occur on the diagonal, indicating predominantly within
age-group contacts. However, for age groups 50-60 and above, the diagonals become less sig-
niﬁcant, indicating substantial cross-age group interaction. This is a particularly important
feature given mortality rates are highest among the elderly, who also have the highest cross-age
group interactions, especially with the young.
Next, we construct the travel matrices F tvfor both cities using travel patterns from the 2013 Na-
tional Household Travel Survey, a nationally representative travel survey undertaken by Statis-
tics South Africa. We use these data to calculate a travel matrix which contains the probability
of travel across all pairs of wards in our model, as well as the probability that an agent does not
travel across wards (an example being an agent who lives and works in the same ward). 28 We
describe the process by which we map the travel survey data to our model in more detail in
Appendix E.
26The latest date for which we have survey data is 2011.
27Hence, we will use the two terms interchangeably.
28The travel survey only asks respondents where they live, work and where they attend school. As a result, travel
patterns reﬂect patterns related speciﬁcally to work and school and not for other reasons such as leisure or shop-
ping, for example.
17
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Table 2: Age-based social contact matrix
This table shows the age-based social contact matrix of total contacts for South Africa obtained
from Prem, Cook and Jit (2017). In this representation, we normalize contacts row-wise within
age group so each value can be interpreted as a percentage of all contacts for that speciﬁc age-
group. Values should be read across columns with each column representing the person from
which the contact originates and each row representing the person receiving the contact. We
add one additional column and row to this table corresponding to individuals older than 80
years old. While our model contains individuals in this age group, the data we use does not
include this age group. We set the contact matrix values of individuals above the age of 80 equal
to the contact matrix values of individuals between 70 and 80 and therefore explicitly assume
an identical contact structure.
0 - 10 10 - 20 20 - 30 30 - 40 40 - 50 50 - 60 60 - 70 70 - 80 80 +
0 - 10 0.51 0.11 0.08 0.17 0.13 0.16 0.19 0.17 0.17
10 - 20 0.12 0.61 0.16 0.12 0.20 0.19 0.14 0.25 0.25
20 - 30 0.11 0.10 0.43 0.19 0.15 0.18 0.14 0.08 0.08
30 - 40 0.14 0.07 0.16 0.27 0.20 0.16 0.19 0.11 0.11
40 - 50 0.06 0.07 0.10 0.15 0.21 0.16 0.14 0.13 0.13
50 - 60 0.03 0.02 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.11 0.10 0.09 0.09
60 - 70 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.07 0.07 0.07
70 - 80 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.05 0.05
80 + 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.05 0.05
For the distribution of initial infections, we make use of F ca, a data set that contains the total
number of detected cases per ward in both cities. For each Ward, we divide the number ob-
served infections over the total number of infections in the metropolitan area and use this to
distribute initial infections over the city. However, because detection of cases in South Africa
was initially severely limited by testing capacity, we do not use detected cases to initialise infec-
tions in the simulation. Instead, we treat this parameter as uncertain and estimate its value.
We calibrate the health system capacity as follows. According to ofﬁcial sources, there were
2162 acute beds in the Western Cape province on the 22nd of May 2020. 29 Additional 1428
care beds were scheduled to be provided by temporary hospitals. Of these, 89% will be in Cape
Town. Assuming that this ratio holds for all beds, we set our health systems capacity to beLct =
0.000917, the fraction of acute beds available in Cape Town divided by the total population.
29See for example: "Winde conﬁrms pressure on hospital system increased, despite not yet hitting peak capacity"
- News24, 22 May 2020
18
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Finally, we calibrate ω ∈ [0,1], the minimum share of contacts that agents need to have even
under a full lockdown, using Google observed mobility data.30 We take the value of the mobility
index on 26 March 2020, the day upon which South African entered into a very strict lockdown
in which the streets were almost empty.31 We therefore assume that any travel recorded on this
day, must have represented travel by essential workers. This results inω = 0.46.
For the government signal, we use the Stringency Index F st r i n (Hale et al., 2020), published by
the Oxford Blavatnik School of Government. The index scores lockdowns worldwide on a 0-100
scale where 0 is the least and 100 is the most stringent lockdown. In response to the Covid-
19 outbreak, South Africa went into a 87.96 stringency index lockdown that at midnight on 26
March 2020. The stringency of this lockdown was eased to 84.26 on the ﬁrst of May, to 80.56 on
the ﬁrst of June, and then to 76.85 on June 8th.
3.4 Estimating Uncertain Parameters
There are four parameters for which we could not ﬁnd reliable values in the literature or data:
the standard deviation of the shock to the private signalσ, the weight of the private signalρ, the
probability of transmission πE , and initial infections. We proceed to estimate these parameters.
Since the possible number of combination of four uncertain parameters is large, we ﬁrst use
Latin Hypercube Sampling (Stein, 1987) to efﬁciently select the initial ﬁve-parameter combina-
tion. These values will serve as the starting point for our estimation procedure.
Next, we take a two-step approach in which we estimate the values of all parameters. For each
initial set of our parameters, we use the Simulated Method of Moments (SMM) methodology
(Franke and Westerhoff, 2012). 32 The method requires that one chooses which moments of
the empirical data one wants to replicate. In our case, we decided to focus on the observed
excess fatality data for both cities over a period of 117 days, the length of F st r i n. Following this
approach, we minimise a quadratic loss function B using a constrained Nelder- Mead simplex
algorithm (Nelder and Mead, 1965) with 10 iterations, where B is deﬁned as: 33
B
(
βsim, βemp )
=
(
βsim − βemp )′ (
βsim − βemp )
. (3)
30Available to download, here. Accessed on 04/17/2021.
31Hale et al. (2020) develop a lockdown stringency index which scores lockdowns worldwide on a 0-100 scale
where 0 is the least and 100 is the most stringent lockdown. In response to the Covid-19 outbreak, South Africa
went into a 87.96 stringency index lockdown, one of the strictest lockdowns in the world, enforced by a large police
and army presence in the streets.
32The seminal papers developing SMM are McFadden (1989); Dufﬁe and Singleton (1990); Lee and Ingram (1991).
33The constraint restricts input parameters to positive values only and was developed by Alex Blaessle, source
code is available here.
19
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Figure 3: Validation of model predicted deaths and excess deaths in Cape Town
This ﬁgure shows how simulated deaths under the lockdown scenario compares with excess deaths
recorded in Cape Town. The root mean squared error (RMSE) between simulated and excess deaths
is 11.28.
 0
25
50
75
0 30 60 90 120 150 180
Excess deaths Simulated deaths
Here, βemp and βsi m are sets containing the empirical and model-generated moments respec-
tively. For each iteration in the optimiser, we simulate M = 15 Monte Carlo Simulations and
score each simulation independently. We then average these scores for a ﬁnal score.
Using this procedure, we jointly estimate all four uncertain parameters. This yields the fol-
lowing estimates: σ = 0.05, ρ = 0.15, πE = 0.02989 and 928 initially infected agents. This last
estimate translates to 34,707 initial infections.
3.5 Model Validation
To validate our model against data, we choose to compare simulated fatalities with realized ex-
cess fatalities in Cape Town. Excess deaths represent the number of weekly deaths recorded
during 2020 relative to the average number of deaths recorded during the same weeks in 2018
20
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

and 2019.34 Excess deaths are regarded as the most accurate measure of COVID deaths, given
concerns regarding an under-reporting of true COVID deaths in national statistics. We report
the number of estimated deaths produced by our model compared to the number of excess
deaths reported for Cape Town Figure 3. The root mean squared error (RMSE) between simu-
lated and excess deaths is 11.28. Our model is able to replicate the pattern of excess deaths for
Cape Town reasonably well, which provides reassurance that our model is able to capture the
basic dynamics of COVID-19.
4 Results
In this section we present our simulation results with the goal of illustrating the role of social
learning in a epidemiological Covid-19 network model. Throughout this section, we present
results for simulations with our baseline model over M = 50 random seeds, reporting the average
effects along with 95% conﬁdence intervals. 35
This section is structured as follows. First, we show the best ﬁt we could ﬁnd for the model
without learning and compare it to the ﬁt with learning. Then, we show how differences in
the weight of social learning affect the spread of the virus and contrast this to the impact of
differences in transmission probability. Finally, we show how lockdown policies interact with
social learning.
4.1 Fitting Excess Death Curves With- and Without Social Learning
First, we ﬁt the empirically observed excess fatality curve in Cape Town without social learning.
Figure 4 compares the ﬁt of a model with social learning to one without social learning. We
show results for best ﬁt obtained using the calibration procedure outlined in Section 3.4.
34See the South African Medical Research Council’ s website for more information regarding data cleaning and
statistical methods used.
35Computations were performed using facilities provided by the University of Cape Town’ s ICTS High Perfor-
mance Computing team ( hpc.uct.ac.za) and the University of Stellenbosch’ s HPC1, Rhasatsha (www.sun.ac.
za/hpc).
21
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Figure 4: Simulated deaths and observed excess deaths with and without social learning
This ﬁgure shows how simulated deaths compares with excess deaths recorded in Cape Town in a model
with social learning and a model without social learning. Both scenarios represent the best ﬁt obtained
using the calibration procedure outlined in Section 3.4. In the model including social learning, the root
mean squared error (RMSE) between simulated and excess deaths is 11.28. The RMSE in the model
without social learning is 20.06.
 0
25
50
75
0 30 60 90 120 150 180
Excess deaths Simulated deaths
(a) Including social learning
  0
 25
 50
 75
100
0 30 60 90 120 150 180
Excess deaths Simulated deaths (b) No social learning
4.2 Social Learning, Transmission Probability, and Contact Rates
Our calibration exercise in Section 4.1 shows that social learning can improve the model ﬁt
signiﬁcantly. In this section, we vary the strength of social learning and compare the effect of
social learning on the curves for our main observables to the effects of varying the transmission
probability and the contact rate, the other free model parameters.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst check how sensitive our model is to a variation of the weight of the pri-
vate signal ρ (conversely, changing the weight of social learning, (1 − ρ)) around its calibrated
value of ρ = 0.15 from ρ = 0.0 (only social learning) to ρ = 0.3 in steps of 0.05. Second, we vary
the transmission probability πE around its calibrated value πE = 0.02989 from πE = 0.02689
to πE = 0.03289 in steps of 0.01. Finally, we vary the minimum share of contacts that each
agent will still visit under the most stringent lockdown regulationsω around its calibrated value
ω = 0.407 from ω = 0.257 to ω = 0.557 in steps of 0.05. Here, we note that, while the contact
rate is endogenous in our model, ω affects the contact rate at every point in the simulation in-
dependently from lockdown policies and learning. Therefore, it allows us to test the broader
sensitivity of the contact rate.
22
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Figure 5: Key observables as a function of varying key parameters
This ﬁgure show infections, critical cases and deaths for Cape Town in a Lockdown scenario, for different values of the weight, ρ, of the private
signal, ζj (t), in the agent’ s compliance decision (top), the probability of transmission,πE (middle) and the minumum share of contacts made un-
der the most stringent lockdown,ω. All ﬁgures show the mean outcome taken across 25 simulations. For reference, in our baseline speciﬁcations,
ρ = 0.15, πE = 0.030 and ω = 0.46. The shaded area indicates the standard deviation.
      0
 50,000
100,000
150,000
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0
0.05
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
    0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0
0.05
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
    0
2,000
4,000
6,000
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0
0.05
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
      0
 50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0.027
0.028
0.029
0.03
0.031
0.032
0.033
    0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0.027
0.028
0.029
0.03
0.031
0.032
0.033
    0
2,000
4,000
6,000
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0.027
0.028
0.029
0.03
0.031
0.032
0.033
      0
100,000
200,000
300,000
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0.26
0.31
0.36
0.41
0.46
0.51
0.56
(a) Infections
    0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0.26
0.31
0.36
0.41
0.46
0.51
0.56 (b) Critical cases
     0
 2,500
 5,000
 7,500
10,000
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0.26
0.31
0.36
0.41
0.46
0.51
0.56 (c) Deaths
23
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Figure 6: Compliance and number of contacts for varying relative strength of the private signal.
This ﬁgure show compliance and contacts for Cape Town in a Lockdown scenario, for different values of
the weight, ρ, of the private signal, ζj (t), in the agent’ s compliance decision. All ﬁgures show the mean
outcome taken across 25 simulations. For reference, in our baseline speciﬁcations, our calibrated value
of ρ is 0.15. The shaded area indicates the standard deviation.
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0
0.05
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
(a) Compliance
300
320
340
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0
0.05
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.75
1 (b) Contacts
Figure 5 shows how these three variables impact the three most important epidemiological
curves: the number of expected infections, hospitalized agents, and fatalities. It shows that
while both a reduction in the weight of the private signal and a reduction in the transmission
probability reduce the total number of infections, fatalities, and critical cases, social learning
brings the peak of the curve forward while not making it longer whereas both a reduction in
transmission probability and general contact rate ﬂattens the curve. On the other hand, de-
creasing the weight of the private signal (and increasing the weight of the social signal) reduces
the number of infections, but does not change the duration of the pandemic. Compare two
extreme cases: Restricting the model to only social learning ( ρ = 0) merely moves the date of
peak infections forward by 2 days relative to a model without social learning ( ρ = 1). While
reducing the weight on the private signal reduces infections, there is a strong non-linearity in
this relationship when the private signal is eliminated altogether ( ρ = 0). In fact, going from
ρ = 1 to ρ = 0.05 reduces total infections by 10%, while going from ρ = 0.05 to ρ = 0 reduces
total infections by 32%. On the other hand, reducing the transmission probability reduces the
number of infections as well as the number of peak infections and also moves back the date of
peak infections. When compared to a simulation with πE = 0.33, a simulation with πE = 0.27
produces 27% lower total infections, 43% lower peak infections and moves the date of peak in-
fections back by 10 days. In addition, the virus also takes longer before it dies out completely.
As a result, changes in the two uncertain parameters ρ and πE produce quantitatively different
effects.
24
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

The fact that social learning reduces the height of the curve without stretching it out can be
explained by the fact that agents will only increase their compliance, and hence reduce their
contacts, once the virus has affected their neighbors in the social network. That being said,
lockdown policies by the government are also a major factor that determines compliance and
contacts. As Figure 6 shows, increasing the weight of social learning non-linearly increases
compliance and reduces contacts, especially once the virus became widespread in July 2020.
Finally, as can be seen in the ﬁgure, with a full weight on social learning the increased rate of
fatalities results in almost full compliance by agents.
4.3 Social Learning and Government Intervention
Finally, since our calibration period coincided with government lockdown policies, we examine
how social learning affects the spread of the virus in the–hypothetical–absence of such mea-
sures.
We consider two scenarios. The ﬁrst scenario is our baseline, the scenario discussed in Section
3. We contrast this with a second ’no-intervention’scenario in which we assume no interven-
tions by the government, meaning that the private signal ξ(t) = 0 for t ∈ T . This allows us to
both analyze the effectiveness of the government lockdown, which is important to quantify,
given the high economic cost the lockdown had in South Africa (Arndt et al., 2020), as well as
the effect of social learning when the government does not intervene.
First, we consider the effect of the lockdown in the model with social learning. In the no-
intervention scenario, infections among the population exceed 3 million, with 81% of the pop-
ulation becoming infected. Peak infections are reached on day 43 of the simulation and the
healthcare system becomes overwhelmed, with the number critical cases exceeding the hospi-
tal capacity for 53 days, resulting in additional deaths as a result of insufﬁcient healthcare. By
the end of the pandemic, there are 12,927 deaths resulting in a infection fatality ratio (IFR) of
0.4%. Panel (e) in Figure 7 shows the evolution of compliance. Compliance takes a similar shape
to infections and critical cases and compliance approaches it’ s peak roughly at the same time as
infections and agents begin to reduce the number of contacts they make, as illustrated in Panel
(f). This endogenous increase in compliance and a reduction in contacts in response to ris-
ing infections illustrates the effect of social learning in our model. Despite this, social learning
happens too slowly and always lags infections—once compliance reaches it’ s peak, infections
have already reached their peak. This highlights an important role for policy in the form of a
lockdown: increasing compliance when infections are low, in anticipation of a rise in infections
in the near future.
25
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

In the lockdown scenario, infections are signiﬁcantly lower, with infections reaching 1.8 million,
resulting in 49% of the population becoming infected. The trajectory of infections is also quan-
titatively different from the trajectory in a no-intervention scenario: the curve is ﬂatter (i.e.
smaller peak and larger standard deviation) and the virus takes longer to die out completely.
Peak infections are reached on day 79, more than 3 weeks later than in a no-intervention sce-
nario. Furthermore, peak infections and peak critical cases are signiﬁcantly lower, ensuring that
the healthcare system is only overburdened for 11 days. Altogether, this results in 3,384 deaths
and an IFR of 0.11%, around four times lower than the IFR in a no-intervention scenario. Com-
pliance behaviour is also distinctly different under a lockdown, as illustrated in Panel (e). At the
beginning of the simulation, compliance is already high, taking a value of around 0.8, compared
to a mechanical value of 0 in the no-intervention scenario. This is due to the fact that, under
a lockdown, compliance becomes a function of a private signal, ζj (t) which reﬂects lockdown
stringency and social learning 1
N j
∑
k∈N j
φk(t − 1), whereas in the no-intervention scenario, the
private signal equals zero by deﬁnition, ζj (t) = 0. As a result, the introduction of a lockdown
leads to an upward shift in compliance early in the pandemic, at precisely the time where infec-
tions and compliance due to social learning is low. Compliance remains high throughout the
pandemic as the lockdown (with varying intensity at different times) remains intact.
These results highlight that four important features of a lockdown are still present in a network
model with social learning. First, lockdowns reduce mobility and thus infections and conse-
quently the number of deaths. Second, lockdowns have an additional dampening effect on
deaths by limiting the extent to which the hospital system becomes overburdened, reducing the
number of preventable deaths which arise solely due to inadequate access to health services.
Third, lockdowns delay the peak of the pandemic, providing additional time for policymakers
to prepare for the pandemic. One beneﬁt of this additional time is that it gives policymakers
time to expand the capacity of the healthcare system. Finally, lockdowns increase compliance
early in the pandemic when endogenous compliance due to social learning is low. While social
learning is effective inducing endogenous increases in compliance, independent of policy ac-
tion, it always happens at a lag to infections, reducing its effectiveness in suppressing infections.
Lockdowns create the initial increase in compliance and a reduction in contacts necessary to
suppress the extent to which the virus seeds. Highlighting this effect is a key contribution of our
paper.
Next, we test how varying the weight of social learning affects the virus curves in the no-intervention
scenario and compare it to our baseline. Comparing Figure 8 to Figure 5, the same basic pat-
terns emerge when we vary the weight of the private signal ρ. Introducing and increasing the
extent of social learning lowers the peak of the infections, but does not change the duration
26
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

of the pandemic. For example, comparing the two extreme cases, a model with only social
learning (ρ = 0) merely moves the date of peak infections forward by 2 days relative to a model
without social learning ( ρ = 1). While reducing the weight on the private signal reduces infec-
tions, there is a strong non-linearity in this relationship when the private signal is eliminated
altogether (ρ = 0). In fact, going from ρ = 1 to ρ = 0.05 reduces total infections by 10%, while
going from ρ = 0.05 to ρ = 0 reduces total infections by 32%. However, the sameρ = 0.05 to ρ = 0
reduction only results in a 7.3% decrease in total infections in the no-intervention scenario.
The biggest difference is that now the private signal ρ = 0 acts as an anchor for compliance.
Again, compliance will remain higher only in the extreme case of full weight on social learn-
ing. In all other cases compliance tends to go back to zero once the virus subsides. As a result,
increasing the weight of the social signal mechanically increases compliance as indicated in
Panel (c) of Figure 8. However, when comparing ρ = 0.05 to ρ = 0, the difference in compli-
ance as the virus takes off all the way through to the peak of infections is small, with the major
differences occurring after the peak of the virus. It also worth discussing the two polar cases,
namely ρ = 0 and ρ = 1. When ρ = 0, agents base their compliance solely on social learning.
Compliance reaches a peak after infections peak and remains at this peak. Given the fact that
in a no-intervention scenario, deaths are signiﬁcantly higher, agents are much more likely to be
exposed to a death in their network of connections and since we encode the compliance of dead
agents to be 1 at all times after their death, this causes aggregate compliance to converge to a
high level even as the pandemic ends. Contrast this with the case where ρ = 0. In this scenario,
by default all agents do not comply with the lockdown policies and do not reduce their con-
tacts. Agents only increase their compliance, when they become infected. If agents die, their
compliance remains 1 throughout, while recovered agents revert to the non-compliance norm.
As a result, compliance is always non-zero due to initial infections and deaths, and there is a
slight increase in compliance driven by increased compliance among the infected population
around the peak of the pandemic.
Now contrast the compliance behaviour in the lockdown scenario. In all cases, compliance al-
ready begins at a high level, driven the stringency of the lockdown which affects the private
signal. In the special case where ρ = 1, compliance simply becomes the private signal, which is
calibrated to the lockdown stringency index. This explains the step changes in compliance be-
haviour. As soon as social learning is introduced (ρ < 1), compliance is smoothed. In the case of
social learning only,ρ = 0, compliance once again plateau’ s at a high level, with the transition to
this plateau being more gradual than the no intervention case, driven by the slower progression
of infections. However, unlike the no-intervention scenario, here there are clear differences in
compliance early in the pandemic when comparing ρ = 0.05 to ρ = 0. Put differently, under a
27
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

lockdown, when agents only make use of social learning this leads to a signiﬁcant increase in
compliance, even when compared to a calibration where a small weight is placed on the private
signal. This change in compliance happens early enough to meaningfully impact infections,
explaining the larger decrease in total infections (32%) when compared to the no-intervention
scenario (7.3%).
The main insight from these results is that the inclusion of social learning has signiﬁcant ef-
fects on the projected progression of the virus. Comparing results from simulations using our
calibrated speciﬁcation, ρ = 0.15 with an identical model without social learning ρ = 1, leads
to a 3.8% decrease in predicted infections and a 14.7% decrease in predicted deaths. The more
pronounced reduction in deaths stems from the fact that in the model with social learning, crit-
ical cases never exceed healthcare capacity whereas in the model without social learning, the
healthcare system is overburdened for 27 days, resulting in many preventable deaths.
5 The Effectiveness of Different Vaccination Strategies
Covid-19 network models are particularly useful to study the efﬁcacy of different vaccination
strategies. Globally, the most common vaccination strategy (Organization et al., 2020) is risk-
based. Under such a strategy, particularly vulnerable agents—for example the elderly or those
with comorbidities—are ﬁrst in line to be vaccinated after healthcare and front-line workers.
The rationale behind this strategy is that a relatively small part of the population is particularly
susceptible to being severely affected by Covid-19. By vaccinating those ﬁrst, governments can
quickly prevent hospitals from being overwhelmed and effectively reduce the death toll. One
possible alternative, put forward by Bubar et al. (2021), is to protect those most at risk indirectly
by vaccinating those who transmit the virus most widely. The idea is that the spread of the
disease can be effectively curbed if those who are most likely to transmit it are vaccinated. 36
Using our calibrated model, we compare the efﬁcacy of these two vaccination strategies with
a third vaccination strategy where random agents are vaccinated. Speciﬁcally, we study how
these three vaccination strategies affect fatalities, critical cases, and infections.
We explore a hypothetical scenario in which one-shot perfectly effective vaccines are available
at the start of our simulation. This means that each agent who is vaccinated will immediately
change her status to recovered. For simplicity, we assume that only susceptible agents will be
vaccinated. Furthermore, we assume that, while the vaccine technology is available at the start
of the simulation, only 500 vaccines can be produced and distributed each period (i.e. per day).
36Thompson (2021); Voysey et al. (2021) present evidence that the vast majority of vaccinated individuals will
both become immune to the effects of the virus and will no longer transmit it.
28
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

This implies that the 100,000 agents in our simulation are vaccinated within 200 days.
The shortage of vaccines implies that a choice needs to be made about which agents get vac-
cinated ﬁrst. For our experiments, we ﬁrst divide agents into their respective age classes: 0 −
10,10 −20,. .. ,80+. For the risk-based strategy, agents within the age class are vaccinated in ran-
dom order. For the connection-based strategy, we use the contact matrix from Table 2, which
captures the probability that an agent in a particular age group interacts with an agent from an-
other age group. We use this information as a proxy for an agent’ s connectedness. Lastly, for the
random vaccination strategy, each day 500 agents are selected at random, irrespective of age.
For each of these vaccination scenarios, we simulate our calibrated model with 50 Monte Carlo
simulations, shown in Figure 9. We ﬁnd that, while the vaccination speed is too slow to com-
pletely eliminate the virus, the curves are ﬂattened considerably by all three. When comparing
the three strategies, the connection-based strategy is the most effective at controlling infec-
tions. If this effect was very strong, it could lead to a large reduction in total fatalities, possibly
outweighing the reduction in fatalities under the risk-based strategy.
This, however, is not the case, on average infections are hardly inﬂuenced by the different strate-
gies. As shown in Table 8, the connection-based strategy leads to 0.2% less infections than the
random strategy, while the risk-based strategy leads on average, leads to a 0.7% increase in cu-
mulative infections. Even when to compared to the risk-based strategy, the connection based
strategy barely leads to a 1% decrease in infections.
On the other hand, there are large differences in fatalities. Compared to the random bench-
mark, the connection-based vaccination strategy results in 46%more fatalities than the random
vaccination strategy, while the risk-based scenario leads to a reduction of roughly 72%. Com-
paring the two scenarios leads to an even more stark difference. By changing from a connection-
based to a risk-based vaccination strategy, fatalities can be reduced by a little over 80%.
Since both total infections and the government stringency hardly changes in these scenarios,
the differences in compliance and contacts are very small.
29
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Figure 9: The efﬁcacy of different vaccination strategies.
This ﬁgure shows infections, critical and deaths agents over time, under the three vaccination scenarios:
connection based; random and risk-based. All ﬁgures show mean results across 50 simulations. The
shaded regions represent 95% conﬁdence bands.
     0
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
1 April 1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep
Connection−based Random Risk−based
(a) Infections
    0
  500
1,000
1,500
2,000
1 April 1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep
Connection−based Random Risk−based (b) Critical cases
    0
1,000
2,000
1 April 1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep
Connection−based Random Risk−based (c) Deaths
6 Conclusion
Our simulations show that social learning helps explain the unusually ﬂat and short Covid-19
curves in Cape Town. The social learning signal is strong when there are many infections in the
neighbourhood of an agent. This decreases the spread of Covid-19 at the peak and since agents
comply for a while, social learning speeds up the decline of the virus. This is different from the
effect of lockdown measures that reduce the transmission probability, which reduce total infec-
tions by spreading them out over time. Nevertheless, social learning alone was not enough to
ﬂatten the curve in Cape Town so that hospital capacity was not breached, increasing the ex-
cess fatality rate. A lockdown was still needed to ﬂatten the curve sufﬁciently. However, we show
that the reduction in the number of contacts is smaller when taking into account social learn-
ing. Finally, we show that in our calibrated model the strategy of vaccinating the elderly ﬁrst
effectively reduces the number of fatalities, even though there are more infections compared
to a random strategy, and even more so compared to a strategy in which the most connected
agents are vaccinated ﬁrst.
This paper has three important insight for policy makers. First, standard epidemiological mod-
els without social learning are biased to overstate either the height or length of the pandemic.
Second, these models overestimate the loss of life due to the pandemic because they do not
consider that in the no-intervention scenario people will also voluntarily reduce their contacts
as a result of social learning. Finally, a risk-based vaccination strategy is highly effective and
leads to much lower fatalities, even in cities with relatively young populations such as Cape
Town.
30
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Having been fully calibrated, the model presented in this paper offers many possibilities for
extensions which will make it applicable to particular policy concerns. For example, agent be-
haviour can easily be modiﬁed to include some sort of trade-off between contacts and age spe-
ciﬁc risks. Furthermore, thanks to its detailed heterogeneity, the model lends itself well to policy
experiments that target speciﬁc areas or age proﬁles.
31
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Figure 7: The impact of a lockdown on key model observables.
This ﬁgure shows simulation outcomes for Cape Town across the lockdown and no-intervention sce-
nario. Panels (a)–(d) show the number of infections, cumulative infections, critical cases, and deaths,
respectively. Numbers are scaled to the size of Cape Town. Panel (e) shows the level of compliance and
panel (f) shows the average number of contacts per household. Panels (a), (b), (c), (e), and (f) include
vertical lines indicating the date of peak infections. In Panel (c) we also include a dotted horizontal line
indicating hospital capacity in Cape Town. All ﬁgures show the mean outcomes taken across 67 simula-
tions.
      0
200,000
400,000
600,000
1 April 1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep
Lockdown
No intervention
(a) Infections
        0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
1 April 1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep
Lockdown
No intervention (b) Cumulative Infections
     0
 5,000
10,000
1 April 1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep
Lockdown
No intervention
(c) Critical cases
     0
 5,000
10,000
1 April 1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep
Lockdown
No intervention (d) Deaths
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1 April 1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep
Lockdown
No intervention
(e) Compliance
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
1 April 1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep
Lockdown
No intervention (f) Contacts
32
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Figure 8: Key observables as a function of a changing weight of the private signal.
This ﬁgure show infections, critical cases, deaths compliance and contacts for Cape Town in a no-intervention scenario, for different values of
the weight, ρ, of the private signal, ζj (t), in the agent’ s compliance decision. All ﬁgures show the mean outcome taken across 25 simulations.
Shaded areas indicate the standard deviation. For reference, in our baseline speciﬁcations, our calibrated value of ρ is 0.15
      0
200,000
400,000
600,000
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0
0.05
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
(a) Infections
     0
 5,000
10,000
15,000
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0
0.05
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.75
1 (b) Critical cases
     0
 5,000
10,000
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0
0.05
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.75
1 (c) Deaths
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0
0.05
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
(d) Compliance
300
400
500
600
1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct
0
0.05
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.75
1 (e) Contacts
33
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Victor Chernozhukov, Iván Werning and Michael D Whinston. 2020. Optimal
targeted lockdowns in a multi-group SIR model. NBER Working Paper 27102 National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Acuña-Zegarra, Manuel Adrian, Mario Santana-Cibrian and Jorge X Velasco-Hernandez. 2020.
“Modeling behavioral change and COVID-19 containment in Mexico: A trade-off between
lockdown and compliance.” Mathematical Biosciences 325:108370.
Adepoju, Paul. 2020. “ Africa’ s struggle with inadequate COVID-19 testing.”The Lancet Microbe
1(1):e12.
Almagor, Jonatan and Stefano Picascia. 2020. “Exploring the effectiveness of a COVID-19 con-
tact tracing app using an agent-based model.” Scientiﬁc reports 10(1):1–11.
Ambrosio, Benjamin and MA Aziz-Alaoui. 2020. “On a coupled time-dependent SIR models
ﬁtting with New York and New-Jersey states COVID-19 data.” Biology 9(6):135.
Arndt, Channing, Rob Davies, Sherwin Gabriel, Laurence Harris, Konstantin Makrelov, Sherman
Robinson, Stephanie Levy, Witness Simbanegavi, Dirk van Seventer and Lillian Anderson.
2020. “Covid-19 lockdowns, income distribution, and food security: An analysis for South
Africa.” Global Food Security 26:100410.
Bailey, Michael, Drew Johnston, Martin Koenen, Theresa Kuchler, Dominic Russel and Johannes
Stroebel. 2021. Social networks shape beliefs and behavior: evidence from social distancing
during the Covid-19 pandemic. NBER Working Paper 28234 National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Bailey, Michael, Rachel Cao, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel and Arlene Wong. 2018. “Social
connectedness: measurement, determinants, and effects.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
32(3):259–80.
Bubar, Kate M, Kyle Reinholt, Stephen M Kissler, Marc Lipsitch, Sarah Cobey, Yonatan H Grad
and Daniel B Larremore. 2021. “Model-informed COVID-19 vaccine prioritization strategies
by age and serostatus.” Science 371(6532):916–921.
Calaﬁore, Giuseppe C, Carlo Novara and Corrado Possieri. 2020. “ A time-varying SIRD model
for the COVID-19 contagion in Italy.”Annual Reviews in Control .
34
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Charoenwong, Ben, Alan Kwan and Vesa Pursiainen. 2020. “Social connections with
COVID-19–affected areas increase compliance with mobility restrictions.” Science Advances
6(47):eabc3054.
Chen, Nanshan, Min Zhou, Xuan Dong, Jieming Qu, Fengyun Gong, Yang Han, Yang Qiu, Jingli
Wang, Ying Liu, Yuan Wei, Jia’an Xia, Ting Yu, Xinxin Zhang and Li Zhang. 2020. “Epi-
demiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia
in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study.”The Lancet 395(10223):507 – 513.
Danon, Leon, Ashley P Ford, Thomas House, Chris P Jewell, Matt J Keeling, Gareth O Roberts,
Joshua V Ross and Matthew C Vernon. 2011. “Networks and the epidemiology of infectious
disease.” Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Infectious Diseases 2011.
Dasaratha, Krishna. 2020. Virus Dynamics with Behavioral Responses. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.14533.
Dasaratha, Krishna, Benjamin Golub and Nir Hak. 2020. Learning from neighbors about a
changing state. SSRN Working Paper 3097505.
DeGroot, Morris H. 1974. “Reaching a consensus.” Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
tion 69(345):118–121.
Dufﬁe, Darrell and Kenneth J Singleton. 1990. Simulated moments estimation of Markov mod-
els of asset prices. NBER Working Paper t0087 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Eichenbaum, Martin S, Sergio Rebelo and Mathias Trabandt. 2020. The macroeconomics of
epidemics. NBER Working Paper 26882 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ellison, Glenn. 2020. Implications of heterogeneous SIR models for analyses of COVID-19.
NBER Working Paper 27373 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ferguson, Neil, Daniel Laydon, Gemma Nedjati Gilani, Natsuko Imai, Kylie Ainslie, Marc
Baguelin, Sangeeta Bhatia, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, ZULMA Cucunuba Perez, Gina Cuomo-
Dannenburg et al. 2020. Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to
reduce COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand. Report 6 WHO Collaborating Centre for
Infectious Disease Modelling.
Franke, Reiner and Frank Westerhoff. 2012. “Structural stochastic volatility in asset pric-
ing dynamics: estimation and model contest.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
36(8):1193–1211.
35
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Golub, Benjamin and Evan Sadler. 2016. Learning in Social Networks. In The Oxford Handbook
of the Economics of Networks.
Golub, Benjamin and Matthew O Jackson. 2010. “Naive learning in social networks and the
wisdom of crowds.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 2(1):112–49.
Hale, Thomas, Anna Petherick, Toby Phillips and Samuel Webster. 2020. Variation in govern-
ment responses to COVID-19. Blavatnik school of government working paper.
Huang, Chaolin, Yeming Wang, Xingwang Li, Lili Ren, Jianping Zhao, Yi Hu, Li Zhang, Guo-
hui Fan, Jiuyang Xu, Xiaoying Gu, Zhenshun Cheng, Ting Yu, Jiaan Xia, Yuan Wei, Wenjuan
Wu, Xuelei Xie, Wen Yin, Hui Li, Min Liu, Yan Xiao, Hong Gao, Li Guo, Jungang Xie, Guangfa
Wang, Rongmeng Jiang, Zhancheng Gao, Qi Jin, Jianwei Wang and Bin Cao. 2020. “Clini-
cal features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China.” The Lancet
395(10223):497 – 506.
Ing, Alvin J, Christine Cocks and Jeffery Peter Green. 2020. “COVID-19: in the footsteps of Ernest
Shackleton.” Thorax .
Ioannidis, John PA, Sally Cripps and Martin A Tanner. 2020. “Forecasting for COVID-19 has
failed.” International Journal of Forecasting .
Keeling, Matt J and Ken TD Eames. 2005. “Networks and epidemic models.”Journal of the Royal
Society Interface 2(4):295–307.
Kermack, William Ogilvy and Anderson G McKendrick. 1927. “ A contribution to the mathe-
matical theory of epidemics.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing
Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character 115(772):700–721.
Krueger, Dirk, Harald Uhlig and Taojun Xie. 2020. Macroeconomic dynamics and reallocation
in an epidemic. NBER Working Paper 27047 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lee, Bong-Soo and Beth Fisher Ingram. 1991. “Simulation estimation of time-series models.”
Journal of Econometrics 47(2-3):197–205.
Leon, David A, Vladimir M Shkolnikov, Liam Smeeth, Per Magnus, Markéta Pechholdová and
Christopher I Jarvis. 2020. “COVID-19: a need for real-time monitoring of weekly excess
deaths.” The Lancet 395(10234):e81.
Makridis, Christos and Tao Wang. 2020. Learning from friends in a pandemic: Social networks
and the macroeconomic response of consumption. SSRN Working Paper 3601500.
36
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

McFadden, Daniel. 1989. “ A Method of Simulated Moments for Estimation of Discrete Response
Models without Numerical Integration.”Econometrica 57(5):995–1026.
Moein, Shiva, Niloofar Nickaeen, Amir Roointan, Niloofar Borhani, Zarifeh Heidary,
Shaghayegh Haghjooy Javanmard, Jafar Ghaisari and Yousof Gheisari. 2021. “Inefﬁciency of
SIR models in forecasting COVID-19 epidemic: a case study of Isfahan.” Scientiﬁc Reports
11(1):1–9.
Mwalili, Samuel, Mark Kimathi, Viona Ojiambo, Duncan Gathungu and Rachel Mbogo. 2020.
“SEIR model for COVID-19 dynamics incorporating the environment and social distancing.”
BMC Research Notes 13(1):1–5.
Nelder, John A. and Roger Mead. 1965. “ A simplex method for function minimization.” Com-
puter Journal 7:308–313.
Organization, World Health et al. 2020. Fair allocation mechanism for COVID-19 vaccines
through the COVAX Facility. Final working version-9 september.
Pasquariello, Paolo and Saverio Stranges. 2020. “Excess mortality from COVID-19: a commen-
tary on the Italian experience.” International Journal of Public Health 65:529–531.
Prem, Kiesha, Alex R Cook and Mark Jit. 2017. “Projecting social contact matrices in
152 countries using contact surveys and demographic data.” PLoS Computational Biology
13(9):e1005697.
Rockett, Rebecca J, Alicia Arnott, Connie Lam, Rosemarie Sadsad, Verlaine Timms, Karen-Ann
Gray, John-Sebastian Eden, Sheryl Chang, Mailie Gall, Jenny Draper et al. 2020. “Reveal-
ing COVID-19 transmission in Australia by SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing and agent-based
modeling.” Nature Medicine 26(9):1398–1404.
Shen, Chen, Nassim Nicholas Taleb and Yaneer Bar-Yam. 2020. “Review of Ferguson et al “Im-
pact of nonpharmaceutical interventions” .”New England Complex Systems Institute 17.
Silal, Sheetal, Juliet Pulliam, Gesine Meyer-Rath, Brooke Nichols, Lise Jamieson, Zaid Kimmie
and Harry Moultrie. 2020. Estimating cases for COVID-19 in South Africa Update: 19 May
2020. Presentation Innovation Pharmaceutical Association South Africa.
Squazzoni, Flaminio, J Gareth Polhill, Bruce Edmonds, Petra Ahrweiler, Patrycja Antosz, Geeske
Scholz, Emile Chappin, Melania Borit, Harko Verhagen, Francesca Giardini et al. 2020. “Com-
putational Models that Matter During a Global Pandemic Outbreak: A Call to Action.” JASSS:
Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation 23(2).
37
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Stein, Michael. 1987. “Large sample properties of simulations using Latin hypercube sampling.”
Technometrics 29(2):143–151.
Thompson, Mark G. 2021. “Interim Estimates of Vaccine Effectiveness of BNT162b2 and mRNA-
1273 COVID-19 Vaccines in Preventing SARS-CoV-2 Infection Among Health Care Personnel,
First Responders, and Other Essential and Frontline Workers—Eight US Locations, December
2020–March 2021.” MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 70.
Toxvaerd, Flavio. 2020. “Equilibrium social distancing1.”Covid Economics p. 110.
Verelst, Frederik, Lander Willem and Philippe Beutels. 2016. “Behavioural change models for in-
fectious disease transmission: a systematic review (2010–2015).” Journal of The Royal Society
Interface 13(125):20160820.
Verity, Robert, Lucy Okell, Ilaria Dorigatti, Peter Winskill, Charles Whittaker, Natsuko Imai, Gina
Cuomo-Dannenburg, Hayley Thompson, Patrick Walker, Han Fu, Amy Dighe, Jamie Grifﬁn,
Marc Baguelin, Sangeeta Bhatia, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, Anne Cori, Zulma M. Cucunubá, Rich
FitzJohn, Katy Gaythorpe and Neil Ferguson. 2020. “Estimates of the severity of coronavirus
disease 2019: a model-based analysis.” The Lancet Infectious Diseases .
Voysey, Merryn, Sue Ann Costa Clemens, Shabir A Madhi, Lily Y Weckx, Pedro M Folegatti,
Parvinder K Aley, Brian Angus, Vicky L Baillie, Shaun L Barnabas, Qasim E Bhorat et al. 2021.
“Safety and efﬁcacy of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine (AZD1222) against SARS-CoV-2: an in-
terim analysis of four randomised controlled trials in Brazil, South Africa, and the UK.” The
Lancet 397(10269):99–111.
Yang, Rongrong, Xien Gui and Yong Xiong. 2020. “Comparison of Clinical Characteristics of
Patients with Asymptomatic vs Symptomatic Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Wuhan, China.”
JAMA Network Open 3(5):e2010182–e2010182.
Appendix A Tables
38
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Table 3: Simulation results for Cape Town
This table shows model outcomes for Cape Town under both the lockdown and no-intervention scenario. We include (i) Total
Infections (ii) Total Deaths (iii) Total Recoveries (iv) Peak Infections (v) Peak Critical (vi) Peak Infections (Day) - the day on which
peak infections is reached (vii) Peak Critical (Day) - the day on which peak critical is reached, (viii) Critical > Capacity (Days) -
the number of days in which the number of critical cases exceeds hospital capacity, (ix) the average number of contacts and (x)
the average level of compliance. We report minimum, mean and maximum values, as well as the standard deviation across 67
simulations.
Outcome Min Mean Max SD
Total Infections 1,796,409 1,841,838 1,889,125 22,600
Total Deaths 3,740 4,944 6,582 568
Total Recoveries 1,783,282 1,829,312 1,879,363 22,981
Peak Infections 156,034 167,860 178,287 4,916
Peak Critical 2,543 3,384 4,264 373
Peak Infections (Day) 71 79 88 4
Peak Critical (Day) 71 88 107 9
Critical > Capacity (Days) 0 11 29 8
Contacts 7.25 8.77 10.55 0.74
Compliance 0.83 0.83 0.83 0
(a) Lockdown
Min Mean Max SD
3,010,721 3,027,310 3,043,072 7,849
11,183 12,927 14,736 677
2,997,893 3,014,380 3,030,057 7,687
639,881 657,508 675,149 6,476
11,744 13,714 16,344 841
42 43 45 1
48 53 57 2
47 51 54 1
14.4 15.94 17.7 0.74
0.12 0.13 0.13 0
(b) No-intervention
39
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Table 4: Simulation results when varying the extent of social learning in a lockdown scenario
This table shows model outcomes for Cape Town for different values of the weight, ρ, of the private signal, ζj (t), in the agent’ s
compliance decision in a lockdown scenario. We include (i) Total Infections (ii) Total Deaths (iii) Total Recoveries (iv) Peak Infections
(v) Peak Critical (vi) Peak Infections (Day) - the day on which peak infections is reached (vii) Peak Critical (Day) - the day on which
peak critical is reached, (viii) Critical > Capacity (Days) - the number of days in which the number of critical cases exceeds hospital
capacity, (ix) the average number of contacts and (x) the average level of compliance. We report minimum, mean and maximum
values, as well as the standard deviation across 67 simulations.
Outcome ρ = 0 ρ = 0.05 ρ = 0.1 ρ = 0.15 ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75 ρ = 1.0
Total Infections 1,449,423 1,725,629 1,803,261 1,845,655 1,874,102 1,903,106 1,912,082 1,918,189
Total Deaths 3,456 4,329 4,694 4,867 5,193 5,399 5,592 5,703
Total Recoveries 1,438,679 1,711,717 1,789,927 1,833,422 1,862,449 1,891,621 1,900,515 1,906,927
Peak Infections 124,731 148,181 160,028 168,184 176,538 182,919 186,204 187,498
Peak Critical 2,477 3,044 3,357 3,427 3,486 3,756 3,758 3,782
Peak Infections (Day) 69 77 77 77 76 77 77 76
Peak Critical (Day) 85 80 86 91 92 85 87 88
Critical > Capacity (Days) 0 0 0 0 8 17 26 27
Contacts 8.09 8.63 8.75 8.8 8.84 8.88 8.89 8.9
Compliance 0.93 0.85 0.83 0.83 0.82 0.82 0.81 0.81
40
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Table 5: Simulation results when varying the extent of social learning in a no-intervention scenario
This table shows model outcomes for Cape Town for different values of the weight, ρ, of the private signal, ζj (t), in the agent’ s
compliance decision in a no-intervention scenario. We include (i) Total Infections (ii) Total Deaths (iii) Total Recoveries (iv) Peak
Infections (v) Peak Critical (vi) Peak Infections (Day) - the day on which peak infections is reached (vii) Peak Critical (Day) - the
day on which peak critical is reached, (viii) Critical > Capacity (Days) - the number of days in which the number of critical cases
exceeds hospital capacity, (ix) the average number of contacts and (x) the average level of compliance. We report minimum, mean
and maximum values, as well as the standard deviation across 67 simulations.
Outcome ρ = 0 ρ = 0.05 ρ = 0.1 ρ = 0.15 ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75 ρ = 1.0
Total Infections 2,650,236 2,858,741 2,964,293 3,026,770 3,094,962 3,166,939 3,194,733 3,209,114
Total Deaths 11,052 12,016 12,710 12,853 13,220 13,804 13,837 13,633
Total Recoveries 2,639,184 2,846,712 2,951,578 3,013,914 3,081,743 3,153,135 3,180,897 3,195,481
Peak Infections 586,456 613,925 635,849 657,669 684,372 723,142 739,804 749,504
Peak Critical 12,167 12,730 13,054 13,739 14,014 15,087 15,173 15,518
Peak Infections (Day) 42 42 43 44 44 44 44 44
Peak Critical (Day) 52 52 54 54 52 54 55 54
Critical > Capacity (Days) 47 49 51 50 50 49 50 49
Contacts 10.34 14.56 15.49 15.89 16.27 16.67 16.8 16.87
Compliance 0.67 0.24 0.16 0.13 0.1 0.07 0.06 0.05
41
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Table 6: Simulation results when varying the transmission probability in a lockdown scenario
This table shows model outcomes for Cape Town for different values of the disease probability of transmission, πE in a lockdown
scenario. We include (i) Total Infections (ii) Total Deaths (iii) Total Recoveries (iv) Peak Infections (v) Peak Critical (vi) Peak Infections
(Day) - the day on which peak infections is reached (vii) Peak Critical (Day) - the day on which peak critical is reached, (viii) Critical
> Capacity (Days) - the number of days in which the number of critical cases exceeds hospital capacity, (ix) the average number of
contacts and (x) the average level of compliance. We report minimum, mean and maximum values, as well as the standard deviation
across 67 simulations.
Outcome πE = 0.027 πE = 0.028 πE = 0.029 πE = 0.030 πE = 0.031 πE = 0.032 πE = 0.033
Total Infections 1,528,622 1,642,775 1,747,214 1,844,732 1,930,329 2,018,185 2,093,194
Total Deaths 3,716 3,932 4,397 4,820 5,733 6,626 7,111
Total Recoveries 1,512,613 1,628,316 1,734,262 1,832,424 1,918,597 2,006,304 2,082,059
Peak Infections 122,025 136,874 153,601 168,189 183,908 200,471 213,817
Peak Critical 2,440 2,842 3,149 3,375 3,745 4,250 4,457
Peak Infections (Day) 84 80 83 77 76 75 74
Peak Critical (Day) 99 95 94 88 83 81 86
Critical > Capacity (Days) 0 0 0 0 18 35 45
Contacts 8.81 8.81 8.8 8.8 8.79 8.79 8.79
Compliance 0.82 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.83
42
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Table 7: Simulation results when varying the transmission probability a no-intervention scenario
This table shows model outcomes for Cape Town for different values of the disease probability of transmission, πE in a no-
intervention scenario. We include (i) Total Infections (ii) Total Deaths (iii) Total Recoveries (iv) Peak Infections (v) Peak Critical
(vi) Peak Infections (Day) - the day on which peak infections is reached (vii) Peak Critical (Day) - the day on which peak critical is
reached, (viii) Critical > Capacity (Days) - the number of days in which the number of critical cases exceeds hospital capacity, (ix)
the average number of contacts and (x) the average level of compliance. We report minimum, mean and maximum values, as well
as the standard deviation across 67 simulations.
Outcome 0.027 0.028 0.029 0.030 0.031 0.032 0.033
Total Infections 2,894,028 2,941,954 2,985,157 3,028,015 3,064,321 3,102,929 3,133,917
Total Deaths 12,092 12,441 12,652 12,750 12,915 13,217 13,419
Total Recoveries 2,881,907 2,929,512 2,972,501 3,015,252 3,051,406 3,089,712 3,120,497
Peak Infections 574,730 603,624 630,594 657,482 682,598 709,875 734,193
Peak Critical 11,700 12,448 13,090 13,834 13,905 14,616 15,081
Peak Infections (Day) 46 45 44 44 43 42 42
Peak Critical (Day) 57 54 55 54 53 53 52
Critical > Capacity (Days) 52 51 51 50 50 49 50
Contacts 15.97 15.96 15.95 15.95 15.95 15.95 15.94
Compliance 0.12 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13
43
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Table 8: Vaccination experiments
This table shows model outcomes for Cape Town under different vaccination scenarios in a
lockdown scenario. We include (i) Total Infections (ii) Total Critical Cases (iii) Total Deaths (iv)
Total Recoveries (v) Contacts and (vi) Compliance. We report mean values across 50 simula-
tions.
Outcome Connection-based Random Risk-based
Total Infections 904,475 911,845 960,703
Total Critical cases 911 687 336
Total Deaths 2,480 1,751 495
Contacts 8.88 8.88 8.88
Compliance 0.82 0.82 0.82
Appendix B Pseudo Code: Initialisation Algorithm
Our algorithms can be split up into two main algorithms. First, we use initialisation Algorithm
1.
Algorithm 1 Initialisation
Initialise city districts: Execute Algorithm 2
Create the household network structure: Execute Algorithm 3
Create the a city wide network structure of recurring contacts: Execute Algorithm 4
Next, we describe each of these sub-algorithms in more detail.
B.1 Initialise City Districts
We use Algorithm 2 to calculate how many agents there should be in the simulation and what
properties they should have to be proportional to the modelled city.
B.2 Create the Household Network Structure
Next, the creation of the household network structure is described in Algorithm 3.
44
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Algorithm 2 Initialise city districts
Generate set of districts:
W ← list of city district identiﬁers
for each w ∈ W do
Assign population size to model district:
Nw ← F pop
w
N
N pop
for each j ∈ Nw do
Assign characteristics to agent:
w j ← w
a j ← random draw from F age
w
w ′
j ← random draw from F tv
w
ζj (0) ← ξ(0) + εj (0)
end for
end for
Algorithm 3 Create the household network structure
for each w ∈ W do
Truncate household size distribution to district size:
˜F hs
w (Nh,w ) = F hs
w (Nh,w |Nh,w ≤ Nw )
Initialize set of households in district: H w = ;
Draw household sizes Nh,w until district population exhausted:
while ∑
h∈H w Nh,w < Nw do
draw new Nh′,w from ˜F hs
w (Nh,w ) and add h′ to H w .
if Nh′,w > Nw − ∑
h∈H w Nh,w then set Nh′,w = Nw − ∑
h∈H w Nh,w
end if
end while
Denote the set of agents not assigned to a household N −
w
Draw Hw = |H w | household heads randomly, without replacement from N −
w .
for each household head j ∈ Nw (with age a j ) do
Assign j to empty household h j ∈ H w with size Nh j ,w
Draw Nh j ,w household members without replacement from N −
w according to F hc
a j
Create network edges between all members of household
end for
end for
This yields the sets of household contacts for each agent N hc
j ∀j ∈ N
45
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

B.3 Create the City Wide Network Structure of Other Contacts
Finally, algorithm 4 creates a city wide network for all non-household contacts.
Algorithm 4 Create the other network structure
Generate effective populations of districts:
for each w ∈ W do
Construct N tv
w = {j ∈ N |w ′
j = w}
end for
for each j ∈ N do
Find total number of contacts N oc
j from F oc
a j
Limit the number of contacts to be feasible: N oc
j ← max{N oc
j , |N tv
w ′
j
\ {j }|}
Draw N oc
j agents, without replacement, from N tv
w ′
j
\{ j } according to probabilities fromF oc
a j
Create edges between j and selected agents
end for
This yields the sets of non-household contacts for each agent N oc
j ∀j ∈ N
The full set of contacts for each agent is N j = N hc
j
⋃ N oc
j
After these algorithms have been executed, we save the modelled city so it can be simulated.
Appendix C Pseudo Code: Main Simulation Algorithm
An overview of the main simulation algorithm is described in algorithm 5
Algorithm 5 Main simulation
Initialization of infections: Execute Algorithms 6
for each t ∈ [1,T ] do
Update health system load: Execute Algorithm 7
Update compliance of each individual: Execute Algorithm 8
Update status of infected individuals: Execute Algorithm 9
Compute new infections: Execute Algorithm 10
end for
Store time paths of all variables
C.1 Initial Infections
Algorithm 6 infects a number of initial agents. These agents are spread over the different dis-
tricts in proportion to the initially detected cases per district from F ca. All initially infected
46
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

agents will have their initial status ( P j (0)) updated to exposed, infected without symptoms, or
infected with symptoms, and the number of days for which they have been in the status at the
start of the simulation T P
j (0) set as a random integer between zero and the maximum days that
agents can be in that compartment.
Algorithm 6 Initialize Infections
Initialize all agents as susceptible: P j (0 : T ) = S∀j ∈ N
Find districts W ca and number of initial cases ˜N ca
w in F ca
Normalize initial cases to model population: N ca
w = ˜N ca
w
N
N pop
for each w ∈ W ca do
Randomly draw N ca
w agents to form N ca
w ⊂ Nw
for each j ∈ N ca
w do
Change P j (0) to one of the disease statuses in {E , I as, I s} with equal probability
Set initial days in status, T P
j (0), by uniform random draw from [0,τP ]
end for
end for
After the initial infections have occurred, the day loop simulation starts and the next algorithms
will be called every day.
C.2 Check Health System Capacity
Algorithm 8 checks if the health system is overburdened and activates the fatality multiplier δL
if it is.
Algorithm 7 Check health system capacity
Compute number of critically ill patients: N C (t − 1) = |{j ∈ N |P j (t − 1) = C }|
if N C (t − 1) > L then
δL ← Q
else
δL ← 1
end if
C.3 Update Compliance
Next, every agent j updates its degree of compliance with lockdown regulations, through a
naive deGroot learning Algorithm 8. Each agent has a private signal ζj (t) which consists of a
public signal ξ(t) and an individual noise term εj (t), where the public signal is informed by
47
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

the stringency index of the country being modelled F st r i n(t). ξ(t) ∈ [0,1] and εj (t) is drawn in-
dependently for each j from a truncated normal distribution with support [ −ξ(t), 1− ξ(t)] and
mean 0 and variance σ, such that ζj (t) ∈ [0,1].
The level of complianceφj (t) of the agents is a weighted average of the private signalζj (t) (with
weight of ρ) and the social signal (with weight of (1− ρ)). The social signal is the simple average
of observed previous (t − 1) compliance of all neighbours 1
N j (t)
∑
k∈N j
φk(t − 1).
Algorithm 8 Update agent compliance
Generate public signal ξ(t) from F st r i n(t)
for each j ∈ N do
if P j ∈ [I s,C ,D] then
φj (t) ← 1
else
Draw private signal: ζj (t) ← ξ(t) + εj (t)
Compute compliance: φj (t) ← ρζ j (t) + (1 − ρ) 1
N j
∑
k∈N j
φk(t − 1)
end if
end for
C.4 Update Agents’ Infection Status
In Algorithm 9, each agentj that is in the exposed, asymptomatic, symptomatic, or critical com-
partments will update the number of days it has been in this status and, possibly, transition to a
new disease status. Let T P
j (t) denote the number of days that agent j has been in disease com-
partment P by periodt (where τP is the parameter that calibrates the tenure in compartmentP).
Since some transitions to different compartments are stochastic, we use random draws from a
uniform distribution with support on [0,1] to determine the outcome of a stochastic event Z
for each agent in each period. We denote the random draw by ˜πZ . Thus, if the probability of
event Z is πZ , then the event occurs only when ˜πZ < πZ .
C.5 Compute New Infections
Next, Algorithm 10 will compute which agents will next become infected by looping over all in-
fected agents and determining how many neighbours they visit and ultimately infect. Infection
occurs as a result of two stochastic events in the model: a physical meeting between two agents
and the stochastic transmission of the virus conditional on meeting. First, a physical meeting
48
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Algorithm 9 Update infection status
for each j ∈ N do
if P j (t − 1) = E then T E
j (t) ← T E
j (t − 1) + 1
if T E
j (t) ≤ τE then P j (t) ← E
else draw ˜πs ∼ U [0,1]
if ˜πs < πs then
P j (t) ← I s, T s
j (t) ← 1
else
P j (t) ← I as, T as
j (t) ← 1
end if
end if
end if
if P j (t − 1) = I as then T as
j (t) ← T as
j (t − 1) + 1
if T as
j (t) ≤ τas then P j (t) ← I as
else P j (t : T ) ← R
end if
end if
if P j (t − 1) = I s then T s
j (t) ← T s
j (t − 1) + 1
if T s
j (t) ≤ τs then P j (t) ← I s
else draw ˜πC ∼ U [0,1]
if ˜πC < πC ,a j then
P j (t) ← C , T C
j (t) ← 1
else
P j (t : T ) ← R
end if
end if
end if
if P j (t − 1) = C thenT C
j (t) ← T C
j (t − 1) + 1
if T C
j (t) ≤ τc then P j (t) ← C
else draw ˜πD ∼ U [0,1]
if ˜πD < δLπD,a j then
P j (t : T ) ← D
else
P j (t : T ) ← R
end if
end if
end if
end for
49
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

between two agents i and j occurs with a time-varying, pair-speciﬁc probability πM
i ,j (t) and sec-
ond, conditional on a physical meeting between an infectious and a susceptible agent, trans-
mission of the disease occurs with probability πE (the fundamental transmissibility of the virus
which we estimated to ﬁt to incidence data). πM
i ,j (t) depends on a variety of features within the
model. First, agent j inevitably has daily physical meetings with all members of their house-
hold, i.e. i ∈ N hc
j ⇒ πM
i ,j (t) = 1. Second, for members in the set of non-household contacts of
agent j , the probability of a meeting between j and i ∈ N oc
j depends on two components: (i)
a fundamental parameter that calibrates the likelihood of a meeting between the two agents
if they are both fully compliant to lockdown regulations by authorities ( ω ∈ [0,1]) and (ii) the
degree compliance of each agents with lockdown regulations by authorities that aim to prevent
transmission. This is modelled as follows: in every periodt, agent j chooses a degree of compli-
ance φj (t) which is a function of a public signal and observations (via De Groot learning) of the
degree of compliance of other agents in the agent’ s network as described in Algorithm 8. The
probability of a meeting between agent j and i ∈ N oc
j is speciﬁed as:
πM
i ,j (t) =
(
ω + (1 − ω)(1 − φi (t)
)(
ω + (1 − ω)(1 − φj (t)
)
Thus, if both agents are fully compliant (i.e. φi (t) = φj (t) = 1), the probability of a physical
meeting is ω2. If both agents are fully non-compliant (i.e. φi (t) = φj (t) = 0), the probability
of a physical meeting is 1. This encodes two features: (i) even with full compliance to policy,
some physical meetings may happen during the course of everyday life, and (ii) individuals can
always coordinate to ensure a meeting should they wish to do so strongly enough.
Appendix D Data Sources
All data used in this paper is publicly available. In this section, we outline the data used in this
paper and provide information of how the data can be downloaded.
• F ca : Observed cases per district
– Source: Western Cape Government
– Each day, the Western Cape government releases a pdf report documenting the num-
ber of cases spatially. These reports can be found here
– We transcribe these cases for each sub-district by hand for each day. A sub-district
is a larger spatial deﬁnition than the wards we use in this paper.
– We then overlay our wards on the sub-districts and assign wards to sub-districts.
50
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Algorithm 10 Compute new infections
for each j ∈ N do
if P j (t) ∈ [I s, I as] then
for each i ∈ N j do
if Pi (t) = S then
if i ∈ N hc
j then
πM
i ,j (t) ← 1
else (i.e. i ∈ N oc
j )
πM
i ,j (t) ←
(
ω + (1 − ω)(1 − φi (t)
)(
ω + (1 − ω)(1 − φj (t)
)
end if
draw independently ˜πE , ˜πM ∼ U [0,1]
if ˜πM < πM
i ,j (t) and ˜πE < πE then
Pi (t) ← E
end if
end if
end for
end if
end for
– Finally, we assign sub-district level infection cases to wards based on a probability
calculated as the ward level population normalized by the sub-district level popula-
tion.
• F hc : Observed age group household contacts
– Source: Prem, Cook and Jit (2017)
– Data can be downloaded from the journal website, here
• F oc : Observed non-household contacts
– Source: Prem, Cook and Jit (2017)
– Data can be downloaded from the journal website, here here
• F pop : Observed district population
– Source: 2011 Census from Statistics South Africa
– Data can be downloaded from Statistics South Africa’ s website, after the creation of
a free proﬁle, here. Once you are logged in, navigate to Community Proﬁles > Census
2011 (2016 Boundaries) in the sidebar
• F ag e: Observed age distribution per district
51
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

– Source: 2011 Census from Statistics South Africa
– Data can be downloaded from Statistics South Africa’ s website, after the creation of
a free proﬁle, here. Once you are logged in, navigate to Community Proﬁles > Census
2011 (2016 Boundaries) in the sidebar
• F T V : Observed travel matrix
– Source: 2013 National Household Travel Survey from Statistics South Africa
– Data is obtained from DataFirst. Data can be found on the DataFirst data portal,
here. You will need to create an account to access the data.
– We discuss the steps taken in mapping this data to our ward spatial structure in Ap-
pendix E.
• F hs : Observed district household size distribution
– Source: 2011 Census from Statistics South Africa
– Data can be downloaded from Statistics South Africa’ s website, after the creation of
a free proﬁle, here. Once you are logged in, navigate to Community Proﬁles > Census
2011 (2016 Boundaries) in the sidebar
• F i n: Informality level
– Source: 2011 Census from Statistics South Africa
– Data can be downloaded from Statistics South Africa’ s website, after the creation of
a free proﬁle, here. Once you are logged in, navigate to Community Proﬁles > Census
2011 (2016 Boundaries) in the sidebar
• F st r i n: Stringency index
– Source: Oxford Covid-19 Government Response Tracker
– Data can be downloaded from Github, here. Download the OxCGRT_latest.csv ﬁle
and select country code ZAF and the column StringencyIndex
Appendix E Travel Calibration
In order to calibrate our model to realistic travel patterns, we use the 2013 National House-
hold Travel Survey, a nationally representative travel survey. Importantly, for our purposes, the
52
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

survey records where respondents live, where they travel to for work and/or education, the fre-
quency of travel, and the time spent travelling. The travel survey allocates respondents to travel
regions of which there are 18 in Cape Town. Our challenge then is to relate the 116 wards we
use in this paper, to the 18 travel regions. We illustrate a simpliﬁed schematic of how these two
structures relate in Figure 10.
Figure 10: Travel data illustrative schematic
This ﬁgure illustrates how the travel survey data we use corresponds to wards, our geo-spatial structure.
The travel survey data records ﬂows of people between regions. Respondents are asked in which region
they reside and then in which region they commute to for work and/or education reasons. There are 18
regions in Cape Town, while there are 116 wards. In this illustrative schematic, we have 3 regions where
travel only occurs between Region 1 and Region 2, and between Region 3 and Region 2. In some cases,
wards will ﬁt perfectly into a single region as is the case with Wards 2 through 5. However, there may be
a case where a ward overlaps with two regions as is the case with Ward 1 which overlaps Regions 1 and 2.
Our goal is to create a ward-level travel probability matrix using the regional travel data. To
implement this, we allocate region level ﬂows to wards in proportion to the size of the both the
origin and destination ward population as a share of their respective total regional population.
We illustrate this process in Figure 11.
There are three scenarios which we encounter. The ﬁrst involves travel between two wards,
which are both perfectly located within two different regions, as is the case between Ward 2,
located in Region 1, and Ward 3, located in Region 2. We construct the ﬂow of people between
53
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

Figure 11: Mapping region-based travel data to ward
This ﬁgure illustrates how we map the travel survey data we collect to wards, our suburb structure. We
allocate region level ﬂows to wards in proportion to the size of both the origin and destination ward pop-
ulation as a share of their respective total region population. γ reﬂects the percentage overlap between
a ward and a region, in the case of an overlap. fi ,j represents ﬂows between regions. δi ,i represents the
share of survey respondents who both live and work / attend school in regioni and who have an average
travel time that is above the 25th percentile of the travel time distribution of all individuals who both live
and work / attend school in region i .
54
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

these wards as the product of:
• N2
γN1+N2
: The size of Ward 2’ s population relative to the total population of Region 1;
• N3
N3+N4
: The size of Ward 3’ s population relative to the total population of Region 3;
• f1,2: The ﬂow of people between Region 1 and Region 2;
We introduce a parameter γ which scales the population of Ward 1, N1. This accounts for a
scenario where Ward 1 overlaps with two regions, as is illustrated in Figure 10.γ then reﬂects the
percentage geographic overlap between Ward 1 and Region 1. We use this geographic overlap
to assign the ward population to the respective region.37
Our second scenario involves travel between two wards, in which only one ward is perfectly
located within a region, as is the case between Ward 1, located in Region 1 and Region 3, and
Ward 3, located in Region 2. In this scenario, we map two ﬂows38
• γN1
γN1+N2
N3
N3+N4
f1,2: The ﬂow of people from the part of Ward 1 located in Region 1;
• (1−γ)N1
(1−γ)N1+N5
N3
N3+N4
f3,2: The ﬂow of people from the part of Ward 1 located in Region 3;
Our third scenario represents a case where a respondent reports living and working/attending
school in the same region. Within this scenario, we need to decide how to assign respondents
who are likely to live and travel within the same ward versus respondents who are likely to live
in one ward, but travel to another wardwithin the same region. In our illustrative example, such
as case occurs between Ward 1 and Ward 2 and between Ward 1 and Ward 5. In order to allocate
these ﬂows, we introduce a new parameter δi ,i which takes a value between 0 and 1, indicating
the likelihood that an individual respondent lives and works / attends schools in different wards
within the same region.
We leverage a question in the travel survey, which asks how much time a daily commute takes.
Using this question, we take the distribution of travel times for all respondents who live and
work/attend school in the same region and assign any individual who has a travel time greater
than the 25 th percentile of this distribution as a cross-ward traveller, assigning the rest of re-
spondents as within-ward travellers. δi ,i then reﬂects the share of within region travellers, who
are likely to be cross-ward travellers. The assumption here being that the likelihood of cross-
ward travel increases with travel time. Using this, we now assign 4 travel ﬂows for Ward 1
37The inherent assumption here being that the ward level population is distributed evenly across the ward.
38In the event that the destination ward also overlaps multiple regions, we can modify these ﬂow equations with
an additional overlap parameter which scales the destination wards population.
55
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed

=====PAGE=====

• γN1
γN1+N2
f1,1δ1,1: The ﬂow of people from the part of Ward 1 located in Region 1 to Ward 2;
• γN1
γN1+N2
f1,1(1−δ1,1): The ﬂow of of people from the part of Ward 1 located in Region 1 who
do not travel;
• (1−γ)N1
(1−γ)N1+N5
f3,3(1 − δ3,3): The ﬂow of people from the part of Ward 1 located in Region 3 to
Ward 5;
• (1−γ)N1
(1−γ)N1+N5
f3,3(1 − δ3,3): The ﬂow of people from the part of Ward 1 located in Region 3
who do not travel;
Following this approach, we obtain a ward-level travel ﬂow between each ward. To convert
this to travel probability, we normalize each outgoing travel ﬂow from a given ward by the total
outgoing ﬂows from that same ward. For Ward 1 then, the probability of travelling to Ward 2
can be calculated as follows:
• Flow from Ward 1 to Ward 2: fw1,w2;
• Total ﬂows from Ward 1: ∑l
k=1 fk,l ;
• Probability of travel between Ward 1 and Ward 2: c1,2 = fw1,w2∑l
k=1 fk,l
;
56
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663320
Preprint not peer reviewed